August 1, 2017 Circulation. 2017;136:e60–e122. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000499 e60WRITING COMMITTEE MEMBERS*
Win-Kuang Shen, MD, FACC, FAHA, FHRS, Chair†
Robert S. Sheldon, MD, PhD, FHRS, Vice ChairDavid G. Benditt, MD, FACC, FHRS*‡Mitchell I. Cohen, MD, FACC, FHRS‡Daniel E. Forman, MD, FACC, FAHA‡Zachary D. Goldberger, MD, MS, FACC, FAHA, FHRS‡Blair P . Grubb, MD, FACC§Mohamed H. Hamdan, MD, MBA, FACC, FHRS*‡Andrew D. Krahn, MD, FHRS*§Mark S. Link, MD, FACC‡Brian Olshansky, MD, FACC, FAHA, FHRS*‡Satish R. Raj, MD, MSc, FACC, FHRS*§Roopinder Kaur Sandhu, MD, MPH‡Dan Sorajja, MD‡Benjamin C. Sun, MD, MPP , FACEP║Clyde W. Yancy, MD, MSc, FACC, FAHA‡¶ Developed in Collaboration with 
the American College of Emer -
gency Physicians and Society for Academic Emergency Medicine
Endorsed by the American Col -
lege of Emergency Physicians, the Society of Academic Emergency Medicine, and the Pediatric and Congenital Electrophysiology Society2017 ACC/AHA/HRS Guideline for the 
Evaluation and Management of Patients 
With Syncope
A Report of the American College of Cardiology/American Heart 
Association Task Force on Clinical Practice Guidelines and the Heart Rhythm Society
© 2017 by the American College 
of Cardiology Foundation, the American Heart Association, Inc., and the Heart Rhythm Society.Key Words: AHA Scientific 
Statements ◼ syncope ◼ risk 
assessment ◼ diagnosis  ◼ prognosis ◼ cardiac syncope ◼ reflex syncope ◼ vasovagal syncope ◼ orthostatic hypotension ◼ neurogenic syncope  ◼ dehydration ◼ pediatrics  ◼ adult congenital heart disease  ◼ geriatrics ◼ driving ◼ athletesACC/AHA/HRS GUIDELINE
ACC/AHA Task Force Members, see page e98
The American Heart Association requests that this document be cited as follows: Shen W-K, Sheldon RS, Benditt DG, Cohen MI, Forman DE, Goldberger ZD, Grubb BP , Hamdan MH, Krahn AD, Link MS, Olshansky B, Raj SR, Sandhu RK, Sorajja D, Sun BC, Yancy CW. 2017 ACC/AHA/HRS guideline for the evaluation and management of patients with syncope: a report of the American College of Cardiology/American Heart Association Task Force on Clinical Practice Guidelines and the Heart Rhythm Society. Circulation. 2017;136:e60–e122. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000499.*Writing committee members are required to recuse themselves from voting on sections to which 
their specific relationships with industry may apply; see Appendix 1 for detailed information. †ACC/AHA Task Force on Clinical Practice Guidelines Liaison. ‡ACC/AHA Representative. §HRS Representative. ‖ ACEP and SAEM Joint Representative. ¶ACC/AHA Task Force on Performance 
Measures Liaison.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on November 12, 2025

2017 ACC/AHA/HRS Syncope Guideline
Circulation. 2017;136:e60–e122. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000499 August 1, 2017
 e61
CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINESTABLE OF CONTENTS
Preamble . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . e61
1.  Introduction  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . e64
1.1.  Methodology and Evidence Review . . . . . . . . . . e64
1.2.  Organization of the Writing Committee  . . . . . . e64
1.3.  Document Review and Approval  . . . . . . . . . . . . e64
1.4.  Scope of the Guideline  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . e64
2.  General Principles  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . e67
2.1.  Definitions: Terms and Classification  . . . . . . . . . e67
2.2.  Epidemiology and Demographics . . . . . . . . . . . . e67
2.3.  Initial Evaluation of Patients with Syncope: 
Recommendations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . e67
2.3.1.  History and Physical Examination: Recommendation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . e68
2.3.2.  Electrocardiography: Recommendation . . e68
2.3.3.  Risk Assessment: Recommendations . . . . e68
2.3.4.  Disposition After Initial Evaluation: 
Recommendations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . e69
3.  Additional Evaluation and Diagnosis  . . . . . . . . . . . . . e70
3.1.  Blood Testing: Recommendations  . . . . . . . . . . . e70
3.2.  Cardiovascular Testing: Recommendations . . . . . e71
3.2.1.  Cardiac Imaging: Recommendations . . . . e71
3.2.2.  Stress Testing: Recommendation . . . . . . . e72
3.2.3.  Cardiac Monitoring: Recommendations . . . .e72
3.2.4.  In-Hospital Telemetry: Recommendation  . . . e73
3.2.5.  Electrophysiological Study:  
Recommendations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . e74
3.2.6.  Tilt-Table Testing: Recommendations . . . . e75
3.3.  Neurological Testing: Recommendations  . . . . . . e76
3.3.1.   Autonomic Evaluation: Recommendation  . . . e76
3.3.2.  Neurological and Imaging Diagnostics: Recommendations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . e76
4.  Management of Cardiovascular Conditions . . . . . . . . e78
4.1.  Arrhythmic Conditions: Recommendations  . . . . e79
4.1.1.  Bradycardia: Recommendation  . . . . . . . . e79
4.1.2.  Supraventricular Tachycardia: 
Recommendations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . e79
4.1.3.   Ventricular Arrhythmia: Recommendation  . e80
4.2.  Structural Conditions: Recommendations  . . . . . e80
4.2.1.  Ischemic and Nonischemic  Cardiomyopathy: Recommendation  . . . . e80
4.2.2.   Valvular Heart Disease: Recommendation . . . .e80
4.2.3.  Hypertrophic Cardiomyopathy: 
Recommendation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . e80
4.2.4.  Arrhythmogenic Right Ventricular 
Cardiomyopathy: Recommendations . . . . e81
4.2.5.  Cardiac Sarcoidosis: Recommendations . . e81
4.3.  Inheritable Arrhythmic Conditions:  
Recommendations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . e81
4.3.1.  Brugada Syndrome: Recommendations  . . . . e81
4.3.2.  Short-QT Syndrome: Recommendation  . . . . e82
4.3.3.  Long-QT Syndrome: Recommendations . . . .e82
4.3.4.   Catecholaminergic Polymorphic  
Ventricular Tachycardia: Recommendations . e83
4.3.5.  Early Repolarization Pattern: Recommendations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . e84
5.  Reflex Conditions: Recommendations  . . . . . . . . . . . . e84
5.1.  Vasovagal Syncope: Recommendations  . . . . . . . e84
5.2.  Pacemakers in Vasovagal Syncope:  Recommendation  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . e855.3.  Carotid Sinus Syndrome: Recommendations  . . . e86
5.4.  Other Reflex Conditions  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . e86
6.  Orthostatic Hypotension: Recommendations . . . . . . e86
6.1.  Neurogenic Orthostatic Hypotension: 
Recommendations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . e86
6.2.  Dehydration and Drugs: Recommendations . . . e88
7.  Orthostatic Intolerance  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . e88
8.  Pseudosyncope: Recommendations . . . . . . . . . . . . . e88
9.  Uncommon Conditions Associated with Syncope . . e89
10.  Age, Lifestyle, and Special Populations: Recommendations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . e89
10.1.  Pediatric Syncope: Recommendations . . . . . . e89
10.2.  Adult Congenital Heart Disease: Recommendations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . e91
10.3.  Geriatric Patients: Recommendations  . . . . . . e92
10.4.  Driving and Syncope: Recommendation  . . . . e92
10.5.  Athletes: Recommendations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . e93
11.  Quality of Life and Healthcare Cost of Syncope . . . . e94
11.1.  Impact of Syncope on Quality of Life . . . . . . . e94
11.2.  Healthcare Costs Associated with Syncope  . . . . e94
12.  Emerging Technology, Evidence Gaps,  and Future Directions  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . e96
12.1.  Definition, Classification, and  
Epidemiology  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . e96
12.2.  Risk Stratification and Clinical Outcomes . . . . e97
12.3.  Evaluation and Diagnosis  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . e97
12.4.  Management of Specific Conditions  . . . . . . . e98
12.5.  Special Populations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . e98
References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . e99
Appendix 1.   Author Relationships With Industry  
and Other Entities (Relevant)  . . . . . . . . . . e115
Appendix 2.   Reviewer Relationships With Industry  
and Other Entities (Comprehensive) . . . . . e117
Appendix 3.  Abbreviations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . e122
PREAMBLE
Since 1980, the American College of Cardiology (ACC) 
and American Heart Association (AHA) have translat-
ed scientific evidence into clinical practice guidelines 
(guidelines) with recommendations to improve cardio-
vascular health. These guidelines, which are based on 
systematic methods to evaluate and classify evidence, 
provide a cornerstone for quality cardiovascular care. 
The ACC and AHA sponsor the development and pub-lication of guidelines without commercial support, and 
members of each organization volunteer their time to the writing and review efforts. Guidelines are official 
policy of the ACC and AHA.
Intended Use
Practice guidelines provide recommendations applica-ble to patients with or at risk of developing cardiovas-
cular disease. The focus is on medical practice in the 
United States, but guidelines developed in collabora-
tion with other organizations may have a global impact. 
Although guidelines may be used to inform regulatory 
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on November 12, 2025

Shen et al
August 1, 2017 Circulation. 2017;136:e60–e122. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000499
 e62or payer decisions, their intent is to improve patients’ 
quality of care and align with patients’ interests. Guide-
lines are intended to define practices meeting the 
needs of patients in most, but not all, circumstances and should not replace clinical judgment.
Clinical Implementation
Guideline-recommended management is effective only when followed by healthcare providers and patients. Adherence to recommendations can be enhanced by shared decision making between healthcare providers and patients, with patient engagement in selecting 
interventions based on individual values, preferences, 
and associated conditions and comorbidities.
Methodology and Modernization
The ACC/AHA Task Force on Clinical Practice Guidelines (Task Force) continuously reviews, updates, and modi-
fies guideline methodology on the basis of published 
standards from organizations including the Institute of 
Medicine
1,2 and on the basis of internal re-evaluation. 
Similarly, the presentation and delivery of guidelines are re-evaluated and modified on the basis of evolving tech-
nologies and other factors to facilitate optimal dissemi-nation of information at the point of care to healthcare professionals. Given time constraints of busy healthcare providers and the need to limit text, the current guideline format delineates that each recommendation be sup-
ported by limited text (ideally, <250 words) and hyper -
links to supportive evidence summary tables. Ongoing 
efforts to further limit text are underway. Recognizing the importance of cost–value considerations in certain guidelines, when appropriate and feasible, an analysis of 
the value of a drug, device, or intervention may be per -
formed in accordance with the ACC/AHA methodology.
3
To ensure that guideline recommendations remain 
current, new data are reviewed on an ongoing basis, 
with full guideline revisions commissioned in approxi-mately 6-year cycles. Publication of new, potentially 
practice-changing study results that are relevant to an 
existing or new drug, device, or management strategy will prompt evaluation by the Task Force, in consulta-tion with the relevant guideline writing committee, to 
determine whether a focused update should be com-
missioned. For additional information and policies re-garding guideline development, we encourage read-ers to consult the ACC/AHA guideline methodology manual
4 and other methodology articles.5–8
Selection of Writing Committee  
Members
The Task Force strives to avoid bias by selecting experts 
from a broad array of backgrounds. Writing committee members represent different geographic regions, sex-
es, ethnicities, races, intellectual perspectives/biases, and scopes of clinical practice. The Task Force may also 
invite organizations and professional societies with re-
lated interests and expertise to participate as partners, collaborators, or endorsers.
Relationships With Industry  
and Other Entities
The ACC and AHA have rigorous policies and meth-
ods to ensure that guidelines are developed without bias or improper influence. The complete relationships with industry and other entities (RWI) policy can be found online. Appendix 1 of the current document 
lists writing committee members’ relevant RWI. For the purposes of full transparency, writing committee members’ comprehensive disclosure information is available online, as is comprehensive disclosure infor -
mation for the Task Force.
Evidence Review and Evidence  
Review Committees
When developing recommendations, the writing 
committee uses evidence-based methodologies that are based on all available data.
4–7 Literature search-
es focus on randomized controlled trials (RCTs) but also include registries, nonrandomized comparative and descriptive studies, case series, cohort studies, systematic reviews, and expert opinion. Only key refer -
ences are cited.
An independent evidence review committee (ERC) 
is commissioned when there are 1 or more questions deemed of utmost clinical importance that merit for -
mal systematic review. This systematic review will de-
termine which patients are most likely to benefit from 
a drug, device, or treatment strategy and to what de-
gree. Criteria for commissioning an ERC and formal 
systematic review include: a) the absence of a current 
authoritative systematic review; b) the feasibility of de-fining the benefit and risk in a time frame consistent with the writing of a guideline; c) the relevance to a substantial number of patients; and d) the likelihood that the findings can be translated into actionable recommendations. ERC members may include meth-odologists, epidemiologists, healthcare providers, and biostatisticians. The recommendations developed by the writing committee on the basis of the systematic review are marked with 
“SR”.
Guideline-Directed Management  
and Therapy
The term guideline-directed management and therapy  
(GDMT) encompasses clinical evaluation, diagnostic 
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on November 12, 2025

2017 ACC/AHA/HRS Syncope Guideline
Circulation. 2017;136:e60–e122. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000499 August 1, 2017
 e63
CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINEStesting, and pharmacological and procedural treat-
ments. For these and all recommended drug treat-
ment regimens, the reader should confirm the dosage 
by reviewing product insert material and evaluate the 
treatment regimen for contraindications and interac-
tions. The recommendations are limited to drugs, de-
vices, and treatments approved for clinical use in the 
United States.Class of Recommendation and Level  
of Evidence
The Class of Recommendation (COR) indicates the 
strength of the recommendation, encompassing the estimated magnitude and certainty of benefit in pro-portion to risk. The Level of Evidence (LOE) rates the quality of scientific evidence that supports the inter -Table 1. ACC/AHA Recommendation System: Applying Class of Recommendation and Level of Evidence to Clinical 
Strategies, Interventions, Treatments, or Diagnostic Testing in Patient Care* (Updated August 2015)
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on November 12, 2025

Shen et al
August 1, 2017 Circulation. 2017;136:e60–e122. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000499
 e64vention on the basis of the type, quantity, and con-
sistency of data from clinical trials and other sources (Table 1).
4–6
Glenn N. Levine, MD, FACC, FAHA
Chair, ACC/AHA Task Force on Clinical Practice 
Guidelines
1. INTRODUCTION
1.1. Methodology and Evidence Review
The recommendations listed in this guideline are, whenever possible, evidence based. An initial exten-sive evidence review, which included literature derived from research involving human subjects, published in English, and indexed in MEDLINE (through PubMed), EMBASE, the Cochrane Library, the Agency for Health-care Research and Quality, and other selected data-bases relevant to this guideline, was conducted from July to October 2015. Key search words included but were not limited to the following: athletes, autonomic neuropathy, bradycardia, carotid sinus hypersensitivity, carotid sinus syndrome, children, death, dehydration, diagnosis, driving, electrocardiogram, electrophysi-ological study, epidemiology, falls, implantable loop recorder, mortality, older populations, orthostatic hy-potension, pediatrics, psychogenic pseudosyncope, recurrent syncope, risk stratification, supraventricu-lar tachycardia, syncope unit, syncope, tilt-table test, vasovagal syncope, and ventricular arrhythmia. Ad-
ditional relevant studies published through October 2016, during the guideline writing process, were also considered by the writing committee and added to the evidence tables when appropriate. The finalized evi-dence tables, included in the Online Data Supplement, summarize the evidence used by the writing commit-tee to formulate recommendations. Lastly, the writing committee reviewed documents related to syncope previously published by the ACC and AHA and other organizations and societies. References selected and published in this document are representative and not all inclusive.
An independent ERC was commissioned to perform 
a systematic review of clinical questions, the results of which were considered by the writing committee for incorporation into this guideline. The systematic review report “Pacing as a Treatment for Reflex-Me-diated (Vasovagal, Situational, or Carotid Sinus Hyper -
sensitivity) Syncope” is published in conjunction with this guideline.
9
1.2. Organization of the Writing 
Committee
The writing committee was composed of clinicians with 
expertise in caring for patients with syncope, including cardiologists, electrophysiologists, an emergency physi-
cian, and a pediatric cardiologist. The writing commit-
tee included representatives from the ACC, AHA, Heart 
Rhythm Society (HRS), American Academy of Neurol-ogy, American College of Emergency Physicians, and Society for Academic Emergency Medicine.
1.3. Document Review and Approval
This document was reviewed by 2 official reviewers each nominated by the ACC, AHA, and HRS; 1 review-
er each from the American Academy of Neurology, 
American College of Emergency Physicians and Soci-ety for Academic Emergency Medicine, and Pediatric and Congenital Electrophysiology Society; a lay/patient representative; and 25 individual content reviewers. 
Reviewers’ RWI information was distributed to the 
writing committee and is published in this document (Appendix 2).
This document was approved for publication by 
the governing bodies of the ACC, AHA, and HRS and was endorsed by the American College of Emergency 
Physicians, the Society for Academic Emergency Medi-
cine, and the Pediatric and Congenital Electrophysiol-ogy Society.
1.4. Scope of the Guideline
The purpose of this ACC/AHA/HRS guideline is to pro-vide contemporary, accessible, and succinct guidance on the management of adult and pediatric patients 
with suspected syncope. This guideline is intended to 
be a practical document for cardiologists, arrhythmia specialists, neurologists, emergency physicians, general 
internists, geriatric specialists, sports medicine special-
ists, and other healthcare professionals involved in the care of this very large and heterogeneous population. It is not a review of physiology, pathophysiology, or mech-
anisms of underlying conditions associated with synco-
pe. The nature of syncope as a symptom required that the writing committee consider numerous conditions 
for which it can be a symptom, and as much as pos-
sible, we have addressed the involvement of syncope only as a presenting symptom. Because of the plausible 
association of syncope and sudden cardiac death (SCD) 
in selected populations, this document discusses risk stratification and prevention of SCD when appropriate. The use of the terms selected populations and selected patients in this document is intended to direct health-
care providers to exercise clinical judgment, which is 
often required during the evaluation and management of patients with syncope. When a recommendation is 
made to refer a patient to a specialist with expertise 
for further evaluation, such as in the case of autonom-ic neurology, adult congenital heart disease (ACHD), older populations, or athletes, the writing committee 
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on November 12, 2025

2017 ACC/AHA/HRS Syncope Guideline
Circulation. 2017;136:e60–e122. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000499 August 1, 2017
 e65
CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINESagreed to make Class IIa recommendations because of 
the paucity of outcome data. The definition of older 
populations has been evolving. Age >75 years is used 
to define older populations or older adults in this docu-
ment, unless otherwise specified. If a study has defined 
older adults by a different age cutoff, the relevant age 
is noted in those specific cases. Finally, the guideline 
addresses the management of syncope with the patient 
as a focus, rather than larger aspects of health services, 
such as syncope management units. The goals of the 
present guideline are:
• To define syncope as a symptom, with dif-
ferent causes, in different populations and 
circumstances.• To provide guidance and recommendations on  
the evaluation and management of patients with suspected syncope in the context of differ -
ent clinical settings, specific causes, or selected circumstances.
• To identify key areas in which knowledge is lack-ing, to foster future collaborative research oppor -
tunities and efforts.
In developing this guideline, the writing committee 
reviewed the evidence to support recommendations in the relevant ACC/AHA guidelines noted in Table 2 and 
affirms the ongoing validity of the related recommen-
dations in the context of syncope, thus obviating the 
need to repeat existing guideline recommendations in Table 2. Relevant ACC/AHA Guidelines
Title OrganizationPublication Year 
(Reference)
ACC/AHA guideline policy relevant to the management of syncope
 Supraventricular tachycardia ACC/AHA/HRS 201510
 Valvular heart disease AHA/ACC 201411
 Device-based therapies for cardiac rhythm abnormalities ACCF/AHA/HRS 201212
 Ventricular arrhythmias and sudden cardiac death ACC/AHA/ESC 200613*
Other ACC/AHA guidelines of interest Hypertension* ACC/AHA –
 Stable ischemic heart disease ACC/AHA/ACP/AATS/  
PCNA/SCAI/STS2012 and  
2014
14,15
 Atrial fibrillation AHA/ACC/HRS 201416
 Non–ST-elevation acute coronary syndromes AHA/ACC 201417
 Assessment of cardiovascular risk ACC/AHA 201318
 Heart failure ACC/AHA 201319*
 Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy ACC/AHA 201120
 Assessment of cardiovascular risk in asymptomatic adults ACC/AHA 201021
 Adult congenital heart disease ACC/AHA 200822*
Other related references Scientific statement on electrocardiographic early repolarization AHA 2016
23
  Expert consensus statement on the diagnosis and treatment of postural tachycardia syndrome, 
inappropriate sinus tachycardia, and vasovagal syncopeHRS 201524
  Guidelines for the management of patients with ventricular arrhythmias and the prevention of sudden cardiac deathESC2015 and  
2013
25,26
  Expert consensus statement on the recognition and management of arrhythmias in adult congenital  
heart diseasePACES/HRS 201427
  Expert consensus statement on the use of implantable cardioverter-defibrillator therapy in patients who are not included or not well represented in clinical trialsHRS/ACC/AHA 2014
28
 Expert consensus statement on ventricular arrhythmias EHRA/HRS/APHRS 201429
  Expert consensus statement on the diagnosis and management of patients with inherited primary arrhythmia syndromesHRS/EHRA/APHRS 2013
25
 Guidelines for the diagnosis and management of syncope ESC 200930
*Revisions to the current documents are being prepared, with publication expected in 2017.AATS indicates American Association for Thoracic Surgeons; ACC, American College of Cardiology; ACCF, American College of Cardiology Foundation; ACP , 
American College of Physicians; AHA, American Heart Association; APHRS, Asia Pacific Heart Rhythm Society; EHRA, European Heart Rhythm Association; ESC, European Society of Cardiology; HRS, Heart Rhythm Society; PACES, Pediatric and Congenital Electrophysiology Society; PCNA, Preventive Cardiovascular Nurses 
Association; SCAI, Society for Cardiovascular Angiography and Interventions; and STS, Society of Thoracic Surgery.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on November 12, 2025

Shen et al
August 1, 2017 Circulation. 2017;136:e60–e122. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000499 e66
Table 3. Relevant Terms and Definitions*
Term Definition/Comments and References
Syncope A symptom that presents with an abrupt, transient, complete loss of consciousness, associated with inability to 
maintain postural tone, with rapid and spontaneous recovery. The presumed mechanism is cerebral hypoperfusion.24,30 
There should not be clinical features of other nonsyncope causes of loss of consciousness, such as seizure, antecedent 
head trauma, or apparent loss of consciousness (ie, pseudosyncope).24,30
Loss of consciousness A cognitive state in which one lacks awareness of oneself and one’s situation, with an inability to respond to stimuli.
Transient loss of consciousness Self-limited loss of consciousness30 can be divided into syncope and nonsyncope conditions. Nonsyncope conditions 
include but are not limited to seizures, hypoglycemia, metabolic conditions, drug or alcohol intoxication, and concussion due to head trauma. The underlying mechanism of syncope is presumed to be cerebral hypoperfusion, 
whereas nonsyncope conditions are attributed to different mechanisms.
Presyncope (near-syncope) The symptoms before syncope. These symptoms could include extreme lightheadedness; visual sensations, such as “tunnel vision” or “graying out”; and variable degrees of altered consciousness without complete loss of 
consciousness. Presyncope could progress to syncope, or it could abort without syncope.
Unexplained syncope (syncope  of undetermined etiology)Syncope for which a cause is undetermined after an initial evaluation that is deemed appropriate by the experienced healthcare provider. The initial evaluation includes but is not limited to a thorough history, physical examination, and 
ECG.
Orthostatic intolerance A syndrome consisting of a constellation of symptoms that include frequent, recurrent, or persistent lightheadedness, palpitations, tremulousness, generalized weakness, blurred vision, exercise intolerance, and fatigue upon standing. 
These symptoms can occur with or without orthostatic tachycardia, OH, or syncope.
24 Individuals with orthostatic 
intolerance have ≥ 1 of these symptoms associated with reduced ability to maintain upright posture.
Orthostatic tachycardia A sustained increase in heart rate of ≥ 30 bpm within 10 min of moving from a recumbent to a quiet (nonexertional) 
standing position (or ≥ 40 bpm in individuals 12–19 y of age).24,30,31
Orthostatic hypotension (OH) A drop in systolic BP of ≥ 20 mm Hg or diastolic BP of ≥ 10 mm Hg with assumption of an upright posture.31
 Initial (immediate) OH A transient BP decrease within 15 s after standing, with presyncope or syncope.31,32
 Classic OH A sustained reduction of systolic BP of ≥ 20 mm Hg or diastolic BP of ≥ 10 mm Hg within 3 min of assuming upright 
posture.31
 Delayed OH A sustained reduction of systolic BP of ≥ 20 mm Hg (or 30 mm Hg in patients with supine hypertension) or diastolic 
BP of ≥ 10 mm Hg that takes >3 min of upright posture to develop. The fall in BP is usually gradual until reaching the 
threshold.31
 Neurogenic OH A subtype of OH that is due to dysfunction of the autonomic nervous system and not solely due to environmental 
triggers (eg, dehydration or drugs).33,34 Neurogenic OH is due to lesions involving the central or peripheral autonomic 
nerves.
Cardiac (cardiovascular) syncope Syncope caused by bradycardia, tachycardia, or hypotension due to low cardiac index, blood flow obstruction, vasodilatation, or acute vascular dissection.
35,36
Noncardiac syncope Syncope due to noncardiac causes, which include reflex syncope, OH, volume depletion, dehydration, and blood loss.35
Reflex (neurally mediated) syncope Syncope due to a reflex that causes vasodilation, bradycardia, or both.24,30,31
 Vasovagal syncope (V VS) The most common form of reflex syncope mediated by the vasovagal reflex. V VS: 1) may occur with upright posture 
(standing or seated or with exposure to emotional stress, pain, or medical settings; 2) typically is characterized by 
diaphoresis, warmth, nausea, and pallor; 3) is associated with vasodepressor hypotension and/or inappropriate 
bradycardia; and 4) is often followed by fatigue. Typical features may be absent in older patients.24 V VS is often 
preceded by identifiable triggers and/or by a characteristic prodrome. The diagnosis is made primarily on the basis of 
a thorough history, physical examination, and eyewitness observation, if available.
 Carotid sinus syndrome Reflex syncope associated with carotid sinus hypersensitivity.30 Carotid sinus hypersensitivity is present when a pause 
≥3 s and/or a decrease of systolic pressure ≥ 50 mm Hg occurs upon stimulation of the carotid sinus. It occurs more 
frequently in older patients. Carotid sinus hypersensitivity can be associated with varying degrees of symptoms. 
Carotid sinus syndrome is defined when syncope occurs in the presence of carotid sinus hypersensitivity.
 Situational syncope Reflex syncope associated with a specific action, such as coughing, laughing, swallowing, micturition, or defecation. These syncope events are closely associated with specific physical functions.
Postural (orthostatic) tachycardia syndrome (POTS)A clinical syndrome usually characterized by all of the following: 1) frequent symptoms that occur with standing (eg, lightheadedness, palpitations, tremulousness, generalized weakness, blurred vision, exercise intolerance, and fatigue); 
and 2) an increase in heart rate of ≥ 30 bpm during a positional change from supine to standing (or ≥ 40 bpm in 
those 12–19 y of age); and 3) the absence of OH (>20 mm Hg reduction in systolic BP). Symptoms associated with 
POTS include those that occur with standing (eg, lightheadedness, palpitations); those not associated with particular 
postures (eg, bloating, nausea, diarrhea, abdominal pain); and those that are systemic (eg, fatigue, sleep disturbance, migraine headaches).
37 The standing heart rate is often >120 bpm.31,38–42
Psychogenic pseudosyncope A syndrome of apparent but not true loss of consciousness that may occur in the absence of identifiable cardiac, reflex, neurological, or metabolic causes.
30
*These definitions are derived from previously published definitions from scientific investigations, guidelines, expert consensus statements, and Webster 
dictionary after obtaining consensus from the WC.
BP indicates blood pressure; ECG, electrocardiogram; OH, orthostatic hypotension; POTS, postural tachycardia syndrome; and V VS, vasovagal syncope.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on November 12, 2025

2017 ACC/AHA/HRS Syncope Guideline
Circulation. 2017;136:e60–e122. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000499 August 1, 2017
 e67
CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINESthe present guideline when applicable or when appro-
priate. Table 2 also contains a list of other statements 
that may be of interest to the reader.
2. GENERAL PRINCIPLES
2.1. Definitions: Terms and Classification
For the purpose of this guideline, definitions of syncope 
and relevant terms are provided in Table 3.
2.2. Epidemiology and Demographics
Syncope has many causes and clinical presentations; the incidence depends on the population being evalu-
ated. Estimates of isolated or recurrent syncope may be 
inaccurate and underestimated because epidemiologi-cal data have not been collected in a consistent fashion or because a consistent definition has not been used. 
Interpretation of the symptoms varies among the pa-
tients, observers, and healthcare providers. The evalua-tion is further obscured by inaccuracy of data collection 
and by improper diagnosis.
Studies of syncope report prevalence rates as high 
as 41%, with recurrent syncope occurring in 13.5%.
43 
In a cross section of 1925 randomly selected residents of Olmsted County, Minnesota, with a median age 
of 62 years (all age >45 years), 364 reported an epi-sode of syncope in their lifetime; the estimated preva-
lence of syncope was 19%. Females reported a higher 
prevalence of syncope (22% versus 15%, P <0.001).
44 
The incidence follows a trimodal distribution in both 
sexes, with the first episode common around 20, 60, 
or 80 years of age and the third peak occurring 5 to 7 years earlier in males.
45 Predictors of recurrent 
syncope in older adults are aortic stenosis, impaired 
renal function, atrioventricular (AV) or left bundle-
branch block, male sex, chronic obstructive pulmo-nary disorder, heart failure (HF), atrial fibrillation (AF), 
advancing age, and orthostatic medications,
45 with a 
sharp increase in incidence after 70 years of age.35 
Reflex syncope was most common (21%), followed by cardiac syncope (9%) and orthostatic hypotension 
(OH) (9%), with the cause of syncope unknown in 
37%.
35 In patients with New York Heart Association 
class III–IV HF, syncope is present in 12% to 14% of 
patients.46,47
In older adults, there is a greater risk of hospital-
ization and death related to syncope. The National Hospital Ambulatory Medical Care Survey reported 
6.7 million episodes of syncope in the emergency de-
partment (ED), or 0.77% of all ED patients. Among patients >80 years of age, 58% were admitted to 
hospital.
48 The prevalence of syncope as a present-
ing symptom to the ED ranged from 0.8% to 2.4% in multiple studies in both academic and community 
settings.49–55
Older institutionalized patients have a 7% annual 
incidence of syncope, a 23% overall prevalence, and a 
30% 2-year recurrence rate.56 The incidence of syncope 
in older adults may overlap with falls, so it may be dif-
ficult to distinguish one from the other. Older adults are predisposed to falls when syncope occurs, with a 1-year 
fall rate of 38% among fainters versus 18.3% among 
nonfainters.
57
2.3. Initial Evaluation of Patients With 
Syncope: Recommendations
The time interval between the index syncopal event and 
the initial evaluation can vary significantly according to the medical necessity for evaluation and the patient’s effort in seeking evaluation. The clinical setting in which 
the initial evaluation takes place also varies. The patient 
could seek evaluation in an outpatient setting with a generalist or a specialist or in the ED at a hospital. The recommendations in the present section are intended 
for consideration under the general principles of what 
constitutes GDMT during initial evaluation, regardless of the clinical setting. These general principles for the initial evaluation are shown in Figure 1. Additional eval-
uation is discussed in subsequent sections according to 
the outcomes of initial evaluation or in the presence of specific disease conditions.
Figure 1. Syncope Initial Evaluation.  
*See relevant terms and definitions in Table 3. Colors cor -
respond to Class of Recommendation in Table 1. This figure 
shows the general principles for initial evaluation of all 
patients after an episode of syncope. ECG indicates electro-cardiogram.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on November 12, 2025

Shen et al
August 1, 2017 Circulation. 2017;136:e60–e122. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000499 e68
Recommendation for History and Physical Examination
COR LOE Recommendation
I B-NR A detailed history and physical examination should be performed in patients with syncope.58–66
See Online Data 
Supplement 1.The history should aim to identify the prognosis, diagnosis, reversible or ameliorable factors, comorbidities, medication use, and 
patient and family needs. Cardiac syncope carries a significantly worse prognosis than does neurally mediated syncope. Prognostic 
factors generally separate neurally mediated from cardiac syncope and are described in Section 2.3.3. The diagnostic history focuses 
on the situations in which syncope occurs, prodromal symptoms that provide physiological insight, patient’s self-report, bystander 
observations of the event and vital signs, and post-event symptoms. Video recordings are helpful when available. Time relationship 
to meals and physical activities and duration of the prodrome are helpful in differentiating neurally mediated syncope from cardiac 
syncope. Comorbidities and medication use are particularly important factors in older patients. A history of past medical conditions should be obtained, particularly with regard to the existence of preexisting cardiovascular disease.
58–66 A family history should be 
obtained, with particular emphasis on histories of syncope or sudden unexplained death (or drowning). Historical characteristics 
associated with, though not diagnostic of, cardiac and noncardiac syncope are summarized in Table 4.
The physical examination should include determination of orthostatic blood pressure and heart rate changes in lying and sitting positions, 
on immediate standing, and after 3 minutes of upright posture.31 Careful attention should be paid to heart rate and rhythm, as well the 
presence of murmurs, gallops, or rubs that would indicate the presence of structural heart disease. A basic neurological examination should be performed, looking for focal defects or other abnormalities that would suggest need for further neurological evaluation or referral.2.3.1. History and Physical Examination: Recommendation
Recommendation for Electrocardiography
COR LOE Recommendation
I B-NR In the initial evaluation of patients with syncope, a resting 12-lead electrocardiogram (ECG) is useful.76
See Online Data 
Supplement 2.ECG is widely available and inexpensive and can provide information about the potential and specific cause of the syncope episode 
(eg, bradyarrhythmia with sinus pauses or high-grade conduction block; ventricular tachyarrhythmia). It may demonstrate an 
underlying arrhythmogenic substrate for syncope or SCD. Subsets of patients with Wolff-Parkinson-White syndrome, Brugada 
syndrome, long-QT syndrome (LQTS), hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM), or arrhythmogenic right ventricular cardiomyopathy 
(ARVC) have characteristic ECG features, which can prompt the decision to pursue further evaluation.
Despite the benefit of identifying a likely cause or potential clue about the cause of syncope from the ECG, prospective studies did 
not conclude that ECG findings significantly affected subsequent management.73,77–80 The prognostic value of an abnormal ECG in 
patients with syncope has been questioned, as well.69,81 However, a multicenter, prospective, observational study76 concluded that the 
presence of AF, intraventricular conduction disturbances, voltage criteria for left ventricular (LV) hypertrophy, and ventricular pacing 
were associated with increased risk of death from all causes at 1 year.2.3.2. Electrocardiography: Recommendation
2.3.3. Risk Assessment: Recommendations
Syncope is a symptom that can be due to various causes, ranging from benign to life-threatening conditions. Risk stratification during initial evaluation is important for guiding the treatment and preventing long-term morbidity and mortality. However, risk stratification schemes for short- and long-term clinical outcomes are limited by the inclusion of all patients with syncope, without regard to the presence or absence of underly-ing medical conditions associated with syncope. For ex-ample, outcomes would not be expected to be similar for patients with vasovagal syncope (V VS), heart block 
with preserved ejection fraction, advanced cardiomyop-athy and HF, acute gastric bleeding, or aortic dissection. The short-term prognosis of patients presenting with syncope is mainly related to the cause of syncope and the acute reversibility of the underlying condition; long-term prognosis is related to the effectiveness of therapy and the severity and progression of underlying diseases, especially cardiac or terminal illnesses.
Recommendations for Risk Assessment
COR LOE Recommendations
I B-NREvaluation of the cause and assessment for the short- and long-term morbidity and mortality risk of syncope are 
recommended (Table 5).68,82,83,100
See Online Data Supplements 3 and 4.Syncope may be an acute result of major hemodynamic abnormalities or a manifestation of serious underlying disease. Thus, assessment of the cause of syncope and underlying comorbidities is necessary.
Short-term adverse events and deaths are determined largely by the cause of syncope and the effectiveness of the treatment. In patients 
without a presumptive cause of syncope, risk stratification for potential short-term outcomes is necessary for immediate decision making in 
the acute setting. Potential predictors of increased short-term risk of death and serious outcomes are listed in Table 5. Long-term adverse 
events and deaths are more likely determined by the underlying medical comorbidities, many of which are cardiac. The evaluation of patients with syncope should include a full assessment of the long-term risk factors, including those listed in Table 5.
69,70,72–74,84–93,95,97
IIb B-NR Use of risk stratification scores may be reasonable in the management of patients with syncope.67,68,72,73,75,87,89,100,101
See Online Data Supplements 3 and 4.Investigators have reported numerous risk scores to predict adverse outcomes after syncope (examples in Table 6). This literature has important limitations, including inconsistent definitions of syncope, outcomes, outcome time frames, and predictors; inclusion of 
patients with serious outcomes already identified in the ED, which biases risk scores toward identifying “obvious” events; the use of 
composite outcomes that combine events with different pathophysiologies; small samples that limited model reliability; and limited 
external validation. Risk scores have not performed better than unstructured clinical judgment.
64,67–75,96,98
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on November 12, 2025

2017 ACC/AHA/HRS Syncope Guideline
Circulation. 2017;136:e60–e122. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000499 August 1, 2017
 e69
CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINESAlthough having precise definitions for high-, in-
termediate-, and low-risk patient groups after an epi-
sode of syncope would be useful for managing these 
patients, evidence from current clinical studies renders this proposal challenging because of a large number 
of confounders. Risk markers from history, physical ex-
amination, laboratory investigations, study endpoints, adverse event rates, and time intervals between these 
events are variable from study to study. Current data 
are best grouped into short-term risk (associated with 
outcomes in the ED and up to 30 days after syncope) 
and long-term risk (up to 12 months of follow-up). Risk markers are summarized in Table 5.
64,67–70,72–75,82–98 The 
types of events, event rates, and study durations from investigations that estimated risk scores are summa-
rized in Table 6.
64,65,76,81,87,89,92,97,99
2.3.4. Disposition After Initial Evaluation: 
RecommendationsThe evaluating provider must decide whether further 
workup can continue in an outpatient setting or wheth-
er hospital-based evaluation is required. The purpose of 
hospital-based evaluation is to expedite the treatment 
of identified serious conditions or to continue the diag-nostic evaluation in the absence of a presumptive cause of syncope.
105,106
The disposition decision is complicated by varying re-
sources available for immediate testing, a lack of consen-
sus on acceptable short-term risk of serious outcomes, varying availability and expertise of outpatient diagnostic 
clinics, and the lack of data demonstrating that hospital-based evaluation improves outcomes. In patients with a 
presumptive cause of reflex-mediated syncope and no 
other dangerous medical conditions identified, hospital-
based evaluation is unlikely to provide benefit.
35 In pa-
tients with perceived higher risk, the healthcare provider 
may recommend a hospital-based evaluation. In this setting, a structured ED protocol can be effective as an 
alternative to inpatient admission.
107–110
Decision support algorithms may reduce health ser -
vice use in the evaluation of syncope (Figures  1 and 
2),105,111–113 although there are currently insufficient 
data to advocate the use of specific decision support 
algorithms for making disposition decisions.
Specialized syncope evaluation units may lead to 
reduced health service use and increased diagnostic rates.
114–119 However, the logistical and financial feasi-
bility of specialized syncope units in North American settings is unknown. A wider acceptance of syncope 
units requires further evidence of improvement in clini-
cal outcomes. Individual risk factors (Table 5) and risk 
scores (Table  6) are correlated with short- and long-
term clinical outcomes, but they are not primary de-
terminants for admission to hospital. Presence of ≥1 
serious medical condition, summarized in Table 7, is the 
key determinant for further in-hospital management of 
patients after syncope.
90,98
Recommendations for Disposition After Initial Evaluation
COR LOE Recommendations
I B-NRHospital evaluation and treatment are recommended for patients presenting with syncope who have  
a serious medical condition potentially relevant to the cause of syncope identified during initial evaluation.105,106,120
See Online Data 
Supplements 5 and 6.Table 7 provides examples of serious conditions associated with syncope that may require inpatient evaluation and “treatment.”
Arrhythmic causes may require consideration of pacemaker/implantable cardioverter-defibrillator (ICD) placement or revision 
and/or medication modification. Cardiac causes require treatment of the underlying condition (eg, medication management and 
consideration of surgical intervention for critical aortic stenosis). Finally, a large spectrum of noncardiac serious conditions may be 
associated with syncope and require management of the underlying problem (eg, severe anemia from a gastrointestinal bleed).
IIa C-LDIt is reasonable to manage patients with presumptive reflex-mediated syncope in the outpatient setting in the absence 
of serious medical conditions.35
See Online Data 
Supplements 5 and 6.Patients with presumptive V VS have a long-term risk of death similar to that of risk-matched patients without syncope.35 
Hospital-based evaluation for presumptive V VS is unlikely to improve long-term outcomes. Possible exceptions that might 
require hospital-based evaluation include frequent recurrent syncope with risk of injury or identified injury related to syncope.
IIa B-RIn intermediate-risk patients with an unclear cause of syncope, use of a structured ED observation protocol can be effective in reducing hospital admission.
107–110
See Online Data Supplements 5 and 6.Two small RCTs suggest that structured ED-based protocols, consisting of time-limited observation and expedited access to cardiac testing/consultation, result in reduced health service use without adverse impact on clinical outcomes when compared with 
unstructured hospital admission. “Intermediate” risk factors included the following: ≥ 50 years of age; prior history of cardiac disease, 
cardiac device without evidence of dysfunction, concerning ECG findings, or family history of early SCD; and symptoms not consistent with reflex-mediated syncope. Both trials also allowed unstructured physician judgment to identify intermediate-risk patients.
107–110
IIb C-LDIt may be reasonable to manage selected patients with suspected cardiac syncope in the outpatient setting in the absence of serious medical conditions.
106,121–123
See Online Data 
Supplements 5 and 6.Hospital-based evaluation of syncope of unclear cause, in the absence of other serious identified medical conditions, has not 
demonstrated an improvement in patient-relevant outcomes. Several observational studies suggest modest diagnostic yield of 
hospital admission.121–123 Patients evaluated for suspected cardiac syncope in outpatient settings are seldom admitted for diagnostic 
purposes, and it may be reasonable to extend a similar approach to EDs after initial evaluation is completed in the ED. Primary 
providers can consider expedited referral to specialists with expertise in syncope, as indicated by availability of resources and 
provider’s assessment of short-term risk of serious outcomes, as an alternative to extended hospital-based evaluation.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on November 12, 2025

Shen et al
August 1, 2017 Circulation. 2017;136:e60–e122. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000499
 e703. ADDITIONAL EVALUATION AND  
DIAGNOSIS
The selection of a given diagnostic test, after the ini-
tial history, physical examination, and baseline ECG, is 
a clinical decision based on the patient’s clinical presen-
tation, risk stratification, and a clear understanding of diagnostic and prognostic value of any further testing. 
A broad-based use of additional testing is costly and of-
ten ineffective. This section provides recommendations for the most appropriate use of additional testing for syncope evaluation. See Figure 3 for the algorithm for 
additional evaluation and diagnosis for syncope.
3.1. Blood Testing: Recommendations
The availability of simple and accurate biomarkers might streamline risk stratification and diagnosis of the 
cause of syncope. This section reviews circulating bio-
markers, which are being evaluated as markers either 
of hypotension or underlying disease processes. None 
have met with strong success.Table 4. Historical Characteristics Associated with 
Increased Probability of Cardiac and Noncardiac Causes 
of Syncope60,67–75
More Often Associated With Cardiac Causes of Syncope
 Older age (>60 y)
 Male sex
  Presence of known ischemic heart disease, structural heart disease, 
previous arrhythmias, or reduced ventricular function
  Brief prodrome, such as palpitations, or sudden loss of consciousness 
without prodrome
 Syncope during exertion
 Syncope in the supine position
 Low number of syncope episodes (1 or 2)
 Abnormal cardiac examination
  Family history of inheritable conditions or premature SCD  
(<50 y of age)
 Presence of known congenital heart disease
More Often Associated With Noncardiac Causes of Syncope
 Younger age
 No known cardiac disease
 Syncope only in the standing position
 Positional change from supine or sitting to standing
 Presence of prodrome: nausea, vomiting, feeling warmth
  Presence of specific triggers: dehydration, pain, distressful stimulus, 
medical environment
  Situational triggers: cough, laugh, micturition, defecation, deglutition
  Frequent recurrence and prolonged history of syncope with similar 
characteristics
SCD indicates sudden cardiac death.Table 5. Short- and Long-Term Risk Factors*
Short-Term Risk Factors (≤ 30 d) Long-Term Risk Factors (>30 d)
History: Outpatient Clinic or ED Evaluation
Male sex74,85,101,102Male sex68,90
Older age (>60 y)88Older age67,74,75,90
No prodrome68Absence of nausea/vomiting 
preceding syncopal event93
 Palpitations preceding loss of 
consciousness83VA68,90
Exertional syncope83Cancer68
 Structural heart disease70,83,88,101,103Structural heart disease68,103
HF74,83,85,88HF90
Cerebrovascular disease70Cerebrovascular disease68
Family history of SCD70Diabetes mellitus104
Trauma68,101High CHADS-2 score95
Physical Examination or Laboratory Investigation
Evidence of bleeding83Abnormal ECG84,90,93
 Persistent abnormal vital signs70Lower GFR
Abnormal ECG68,72,74,75,105
Positive troponin75
*Definitions for clinical endpoints or serious outcomes vary by study. 
The specific endpoints for the individual studies in this table are defined in 
Online Data Supplements 3 and 4 and summarized in Table 6 for selected 
studies. This table includes individual risk predictors from history, physical 
examination, and laboratory studies associated with adverse outcomes from 
selected studies.
CHADS-2 indicates congestive heart failure, hypertension, age ≥ 75 
years, diabetes mellitus, and stroke or transient ischemic attack; ECG, electrocardiogram; ED, emergency department; GFR, glomerular filtration 
rate; HF, heart failure; SCD, sudden cardiac death; and VA, ventricular 
arrhythmias.
Recommendations for Blood Testing
COR LOE Recommendations
IIa B-NRTargeted blood tests are reasonable in the evaluation of selected patients with syncope identified on the basis of clinical assessment from history, physical examination, and ECG.
124
See Online Data Supplements 7 and 8.Although broad-panel testing is common in clinical practice at the point of triage, there are no data on the utility of this approach. Data to support specific blood testing are largely descriptive data from case series and registries. Complete blood count and 
electrolyte panel are frequently obtained during syncope evaluation. The diagnostic yield is low when these are used routinely; 
however, when these blood tests are conducted in patients with a suspected related diagnosis (eg, history of peptic ulcer disease, 
or tarry stools associated with OH on physical examination), test results can be diagnostic and useful for guiding therapy. Thus, 
specific testing should stem from the assessment by history and physical examination when the nature of the syncope presentation 
or associated comorbidities suggests a diagnostic or more likely prognostic role for laboratory testing. Results have not been linked 
to clinical decision making or outcomes.
125–128
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on November 12, 2025

2017 ACC/AHA/HRS Syncope Guideline
Circulation. 2017;136:e60–e122. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000499 August 1, 2017
 e71
CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINESIIb C-LDUsefulness of brain natriuretic peptide and high-sensitivity troponin measurement is uncertain in patients for whom a 
cardiac cause of syncope is suspected.125,127,129,130
See Online Data 
Supplements 7 and 8.Although data to support biomarker testing are in general relatively weak, there are sufficient data to suggest that natriuretic peptide is elevated in patients whose subsequent cause for syncope is determined to be cardiac. A systematic review of biomarkers 
found little value in contemporary troponin measurement unless acute myocardial infarction is suspected, and there is modest 
predictive value for high-sensitivity troponin and natriuretic peptides for major adverse cardiovascular events. The ability of troponin 
and natriuretic peptide measurement to influence clinical decision making or patient outcome is unknown.
129
III: No 
BenefitB-NRRoutine and comprehensive laboratory testing is not useful in the evaluation of patients  
with syncope.126,131
See Online Data Supplements 7 and 8.There are no data on the utility of a standardized broad panel of laboratory testing in patients with syncope. Specific cardiac 
biomarkers may play a limited role when directed by clinical suspicion from the baseline assessment. There is little biological plausibility 
linking the remaining elements of broad-panel laboratory testing to the presentation or mechanism of syncope.Recommendations for Blood Testing (Continued)
COR LOE Recommendations
Recommendations for Cardiac Imaging
COR LOE Recommendations
IIa B-NRTransthoracic echocardiography can be useful in selected patients presenting with syncope if structural heart  
disease is suspected.80,99,124
See Online Data Supplement 9.Cardiac imaging is often used to identify a structural cardiac abnormality, and imaging with transthoracic echocardiography 
is widely used for this purpose because it is noninvasive and low risk. Transthoracic echocardiography can be useful when 
healthcare providers are concerned about the presence of valvular disease (eg, aortic stenosis), HCM, or LV dysfunction.
124,133 
In a retrospective study of patients presenting with syncope and suspected cardiac disease after history, physical examination, 
or ECG, the echocardiogram suggested a diagnosis of cardiac syncope in 48% of the study cohort.99 In a prospective 
evaluation of 650 patients referred for syncope of unknown origin, 88 patients had an abnormal history or ECG; an echocardiogram showed systolic dysfunction (LV ejection fraction ≥ 40%) in 24 patients
80; and 50% of patients with LV 
systolic dysfunction had manifest arrhythmias, compared with 9% with minor, incidental abnormalities (P <0.01). Although an 
echocardiogram may not be able to establish the immediate cause of syncope, it provides information for a potential disease 
substrate related to prognosis.
IIb B-NRComputed tomography (CT) or magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) may be useful in selected patients presenting  with syncope of suspected cardiac etiology.
134
See Online Data Supplement 9.Imaging modalities, including CT and MRI, are usually reserved for selected patients presenting with syncope, especially when other noninvasive means are inadequate or inconclusive. These modalities offer superior spatial resolution in delineating 
cardiovascular anatomy (eg, in patients with structural, infiltrative, or congenital heart disease [CHD]).
135,136 The use of CT and MRI 
in contemporary cardiology is increasing.137,138 Their role in the evaluation of syncope has been investigated.139 The use of CT or MRI 
increased from 21% in 2001 to 45% in 2010, as reported in a series of patients evaluated for syncope in the ED.134 MRI is useful 
when there is a suspicion of ARVC or cardiac sarcoidosis.140,141 When pulmonary embolism is suspected in patients presenting with 
syncope to the hospital, CT can confirm the diagnosis in selected patients.128 CT or MRI may not provide answers about the cause 
of syncope. They provide information on the structural disease substrate relevant to the overall diagnosis and subsequent evaluation and follow-up in selected patients presenting with syncope.
III: No 
BenefitB-NRRoutine cardiac imaging is not useful in the evaluation of patients with syncope unless cardiac etiology is suspected  
on the basis of an initial evaluation, including history, physical examination, or ECG.
77,99
See Online Data Supplement 9.Although some investigators have advocated for cardiac imaging—particularly transthoracic echocardiography—as a routine screening examination for patients with syncope who lack clear signs or symptoms of cardiovascular disease,
133 clinical evidence 
does not support such practice. Unexpected findings on echocardiograms to explain syncope are uncommon; a “screening” 
echocardiogram is of low utility.142 In 1 evaluation of 2106 inpatients with syncope, a battery of testing, including cardiac enzymes, 
CT scans, echocardiography, carotid ultrasonography, and electroencephalography, contributed to the diagnosis or management in <5% of cases and helped determine the etiology of syncope <2% of the time.
77 Similarly, in another retrospective series of 
128 inpatients with syncope, it was found that echocardiograms in patients with no clinical evidence of heart disease according to history, physical examination, or ECG either were normal (63%) or provided no useful additional information for arriving at a 
diagnosis (37%).
99 Finally, radionuclide imaging and cardiac catheterization have little role in the evaluation of syncope.3.2.1. Cardiac Imaging: Recommendations3.2. Cardiovascular Testing: 
Recommendations
Cardiovascular causes of syncope are common. The 
presence of significant cardiovascular diseases, often associated with the cardiovascular causes of syncope, 
portends a poor prognosis.
35,132 As such, cardiovascu-
lar testing can be a critical element in the evaluation and management of selected patients with syncope. It 
is important also to recognize that the abnormalities 
found during cardiovascular testing may not have a causal relationship to syncope itself. Determining the significance of such abnormalities, their causality, and whether subsequent treatment is merited requires clini-
cal judgment and appropriate selection of cardiovascu-
lar testing.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on November 12, 2025

Shen et al
August 1, 2017 Circulation. 2017;136:e60–e122. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000499 e72
3.2.3. Cardiac Monitoring: Recommendations
Although cardiac monitoring is often used in the evalu-ation of palpitations or intermittent arrhythmias, the following recommendations and discussion are focused primarily on the use of monitoring for the evaluation of patients with syncope. The choice of monitoring system and duration should be appropriate to the likelihood that a spontaneous event will be detected and the pa-tient may be incapacitated and unable to voluntarily trigger the recording system.3.2.2. Stress Testing: Recommendation
Recommendation for Stress Testing
COR LOE Recommendation
IIa C-LDExercise stress testing can be useful to establish the cause of syncope in selected patients who experience syncope or 
presyncope during exertion.132,143
See Online Data  Supplement 10.Exertion can result in syncope in a variety of conditions, including structural lesions, such as hypertrophic obstructive 
cardiomyopathy and aortic stenosis; interarterial anomalous coronary artery and pulmonary arterial hypertension; and 
channelopathies, such as LQTS (type 1) and catecholaminergic polymorphic ventricular tachycardia (CPVT). Subjecting a patient to 
a treadmill exercise test to reproduce the symptoms or evaluate the hemodynamic response to exertion (eg, hypotension) must be 
done with extreme caution and in an environment with proper advanced life support.
In a prospective evaluation of 433 patients in which tachyarrhythmia was studied as the etiology for exertional syncope,
132 an 
ECG stress evaluation was felt to be the sole test useful in identifying a presumptive cause of syncope in only 2 patients. However, 
bradyarrhythmia may ultimately be responsible for exertional syncope as well, and may only be elicited during stress testing. In rare 
instances, exercise-induced ischemia143–146 or coronary vasospasm147 may lead to high-grade/infranodal AV block in patients with 
underlying coronary disease.
Recommendations for Cardiac Monitoring
COR LOE Recommendations
I C-EO The choice of a specific cardiac monitor should be determined on the basis of the frequency and nature of syncope events.
N/AThe technology of cardiac rhythm monitoring is dynamic and advancing at rapid speed. Several types of ambulatory cardiac rhythm monitoring are summarized in Table 8. Their selection and usefulness are highly dependent on patient characteristics with regard to 
the frequency of syncope and the likelihood of an arrhythmic cause of syncope.
148
IIa B-NRTo evaluate selected ambulatory patients with syncope of suspected arrhythmic etiology, the following external 
cardiac monitoring approaches can be useful:
 1.  Holter monitor149–153
 2.  Transtelephonic monitor150,154,155
 3.  External loop recorder150,154–156
 4.  Patch recorder157–159
 5.  Mobile cardiac outpatient telemetry160,161
See Online Data 
Supplements 11 and 
12.The types of external monitoring devices are summarized in Table 8. The effectiveness of any external cardiac monitoring device for syncope evaluation is related to the duration of monitoring, continuous versus intermittent monitoring, frequency of syncope, 
duration of prodrome, and suddenness of incapacitation. The patient activation, before or after an event, allows for symptom 
rhythm correlation; however, some external loop recorders are of limited use in patients who are temporarily incapacitated around 
the time of syncope. External loop recorders are also limited by infrequent syncopal events. The advantage of an external loop recorder over Holter monitoring stems from a longer monitoring period, which confers a higher yield than Holter monitoring
149,153 
and may offer a diagnosis after a negative Holter evaluation.150 Although the diagnostic yield of an external loop recordermay 
be lower than that of an implantable cardiac monitor (ICM), the noninvasive strategy is reasonable as a first approach. One 
prospective, multicenter study of 392 patients (28% with syncope) reported a 4-week diagnostic yield of 24.5%, with recurrent 
events and previous history of supraventricular arrhythmias being strong predictors of diagnostic events.156
The advances of new patch-based devices offer another and often less cumbersome means of identifying an arrhythmic 
cause for syncope.157–159 The duration of monitoring (2 to 14 days) is often shorter than for the external loop recorder or mobile 
continuous outpatient telemetry.
Some practices offer mobile continuous outpatient telemetry devices, which provide real-time arrhythmia monitoring and 
analysis. An RCT161 of 266 patients with suspected intermittent arrhythmias demonstrated that an arrhythmia was diagnosed in 
88% of mobile continuous outpatient telemetry patients versus 75% of external loop recorder patients (P=0.008). Importantly, 
therewas a similar result in the subgroup of patients presenting with syncope or presyncope, with a significantly higher diagnostic 
yield in the mobile continuous outpatient telemetry group (89% versus 69%; P=0.008).
IIa B-R To evaluate selected ambulatory patients with syncope of suspected arrhythmic etiology, an ICM can be useful.149,150,153,161–175
See Online Data Supplements 11 and 
12.Several RCTs and observational studies have demonstrated a benefit of the ICM in establishing a diagnosis in syncope of unclear 
etiology. In a prospective study of 60 patients with syncope of unknown origin, the diagnosis (primarily bradyarrhythmia) was 
made in 55% with ICM, compared with a 19% diagnostic yield with conventional testing (external loop recorder, followed by tilt-
table testing and electrophysiological study [EPS]) (P=0.0014).
162 These findings are consistent with other studies, which generally 
have shown that patients who underwent the ICM approach experienced higher rates of diagnosis than those of patients who 
underwent the conventional approach.164,176,177 A study on cost-effectiveness of the ICM strategy reported that the mean cost 
per participant was higher but the cost per diagnosis was lower in patients who received ICM than in patients who underwent conventional approaches.
162,164,178 Key confounders in cost assessment include differences in healthcare settings, heterogeneity of 
patient populations, pricing of devices and healthcare delivery, and changing technology.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on November 12, 2025

2017 ACC/AHA/HRS Syncope Guideline
Circulation. 2017;136:e60–e122. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000499 August 1, 2017
 e73
CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINESTable 6. Examples of Syncope Risk Scores
Study/ 
Reference Year Sample NEvents  
N (%) Outcome DefinitionED 
Events* Predictors NPV (%)†
Martin901997 252 104 (41%) 1-y death/arrhythmia Yes Abnormal ECG‡; >45 y of age; VA; HF 93
Sarasin742003 175 30 (17%) Inpatient arrhythmia Yes Abnormal ECG‡; >65 y of age; HF 98
OESIL672003 270 31 (11%) 1-y death N/A Abnormal ECG‡; >65 y of age; no prodrome; cardiac history100
SFSR
722004 684 79 (12%) 7-d serious events§ Yes Abnormal ECG‡; dyspnea; hematocrit; systolic BP <90 mm Hg; HF99
Boston Syncope Rule
702007 293 68 (23%) 30-d serious events‖ Yes Symptoms of acute coronary syndrome; worrisome cardiac history; family history 
of SCD; VHD; signs of conduction disease; 
volume depletion; persistent abnormal vital 
signs; primary central nervous event100
Del Rosso
692008 260 44 (17%) Cardiac etiology N/A Abnormal ECG‡/cardiac history; palpitations; 
exertional; supine; precipitant (a low-risk 
factor); autonomic prodrome (low-risk factors)99
STePS682008 676 41 (6%) 10-d serious events¶ Yes Abnormal ECG‡; trauma; no prodrome; male 
sex–
Syncope Risk Score
752009 2584 173 (7%) 30-d serious events# No Abnormal ECG‡; >90 y of age; male sex; positive troponin; history of arrhythmia; 
systolic BP >160 mm Hg; near-syncope (a low-
risk factor)97
ROSE
732010 550 40 (7%) 30-d serious events# Yes Abnormal ECG‡; B-natriuretic peptide; 
hemoglobin; O2Sat; fecal occult blood98
*Did the study include events diagnosed during the ED evaluation?
†NPV: negative predictive value for lowest-risk group for the specific events defined by the study.
‡Abnormal ECG is defined variably in these studies. In the context of syncope evaluation, an abnormal ECG is any rhythm other than normal sinus rhythm, 
conduction delays (BBB, type-2 second-degree AVB or third-degree AVB), presence of Q waves, ST abnormalities, or prolonged QT interval.
§Events: death, MI, arrhythmia, pulmonary embolism, stroke, hemorrhage, or readmission.
║Events: death, major therapeutic procedure, MI, arrhythmia, pulmonary embolism, stroke, sepsis, hemorrhage, or life-threatening sequelae of syncope.
¶Events: death, major therapeutic procedure, or readmission.#Events: death, arrhythmia, MI, new diagnosis of severe structural heart disease, pulmonary embolism, aortic dissection, stroke/TIA, cerebral hemorrhage, or 
significant anemia requiring blood transfusion.
AVB indicates atrioventricular block; BBB, bundle-branch block; BP , blood pressure; ECG, electrocardiogram; ED, emergency department; HF, heart failure; MI, 
myocardial infarction; N/A, not available; NPV, negative predictive value; O
2Sat, oxygen saturation; OESIL, Osservatorio Epidemiologico sulla Sincope nel Lazio; 
ROSE, Risk Stratification of Syncope in the ED; SCD, sudden cardiac death; SFSR, San Francisco Syncope Rule; STePS, Short-Term Prognosis of Syncope Study; TIA, 
transient ischemic attack; VA, ventricular arrhythmias; and VHD, valvular heart disease.Recommendation for In-Hospital Telemetry
COR LOE Recommendation
I B-NRContinuous ECG monitoring is useful for hospitalized patients admitted for syncope evaluation with suspected cardiac 
etiology.77,182,183
See Online Data Supplement 13.Given that patients with syncope and structural heart disease are at high risk of death or significant arrhythmia,
184 inpatient telemetry 
could be a valuable diagnostic modality. However, the diagnostic yield of inpatient telemetry is low in the absence of high suspicion 
about an arrhythmic cause.183 One study of 172 patients with syncope presenting to the ED and admitted to a telemetry unit 
revealed a diagnostic yield in 18% of patients, with 15% demonstrating bradyarrhythmias.182 The yield was highest in older patients 
with HF. No deaths occurred within an average monitoring time of 4.8±2.7 days. In 1 prospective study of 2240 patients admitted to a telemetry unit, patients admitted for syncope (10%) had low rates of unexpected intensive care transfer, and most were unrelated 
to arrhythmic conditions.
185 Furthermore, in another prospective evaluation of 205 patients admitted to telemetry, significant 
arrhythmias were seen in only 12 patients with known or suspected coronary artery disease or in those with previously documented 
arrhythmias.183 No arrhythmias or interventions occurred in the 7% of patients who were assigned to telemetry because of syncope. 
A large, prospective evaluation of 2106 patients admitted with syncope demonstrated high telemetry use (95%) but a diagnostic yield of only 5%.
77 Continuous telemetry in the hospital for patients presenting with syncope not suspected of a cardiac etiology is 
not cost-effective.186,1873.2.4. In-Hospital Telemetry: Recommendation
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on November 12, 2025

Shen et al
August 1, 2017 Circulation. 2017;136:e60–e122. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000499 e74
3.2.5. Electrophysiological Study: 
RecommendationsThe EPS can identify a substrate for clinical bradyar -
rhythmia or tachyarrhythmia as a potential cause of syncope after a nondiagnostic initial evaluation. Despite these purported benefits, EPS has a limited role in the evaluation of syncope, especially in patients without known heart disease or with low suspicion of an ar -
rhythmic etiology.
117,187,188 The sensitivity and specificity 
of EPS to assess sinus node dysfunction and AV con-duction disease in patients with syncope are variable, depending on patient selection and pretest probability of a bradycardia substrate.
189–191
Inducible ventricular tachycardia (VT) in patients with 
syncope, ischemic heart disease, and a prior history of myocardial infarction is predictive of spontaneous VT and prognosis. The causal relationship between the inducible VT during EPS and syncope requires clinical correlation. The lack of an inducible sustained mono-morphic VT predicts lower risk of spontaneous VT and better prognosis.
192 The overall role of EPS in the evalu-
ation of ventricular arrhythmias (VA) in patients with syncope has diminished in the past 2 decades. This is primarily due to the use of ICD as a Class I indication for the primary prevention of SCD in patients with ischemic or nonischemic cardiomyopathy and significant LV dys-function (ejection fraction ≤35%). An EPS is no longer required in patients with syncope before consideration of ICD therapy. However, although ICDs may reduce risk of death, they may not prevent syncope. The role of EPS in patients with syncope suspected to be due to VA and acquired nonischemic heart disease is unproven.
193–198
Figure 2. Patient Disposi-
tion After Initial Evaluation for Syncope.  
Colors correspond to Class 
of Recommendation in Table 1. ED indicates emergency department; and pts, patients.
Recommendations for EPS
COR LOE Recommendations
IIa B-NR EPS can be useful for evaluation of selected patients with syncope of suspected arrhythmic etiology.91,151,199–205
See Online Data 
Supplement 14.Diagnostic results detected during EPS occur predominantly in patients who have cardiac disease (eg, conduction system 
delay, coronary artery disease, cardiomyopathy, and valvular heart disease). Most of the literature evaluating EPS as a means 
to diagnose syncope is relatively old, and the data were obtained in referral centers where there was a high pretest probability of an arrhythmia. Eight of these small retrospective studies
91,199–205 (total n=625) found that, of the 406 patients with cardiac 
disease or an abnormal ECG, 41% had a positive result (of these, 21% had VT and 34% had a bradycardia).151 Of 219 
patients without evidence of heart disease, only 5% had a positive result (1% with VT and 10% with evidence of substrate for 
symptomatic bradycardia). Overall, the diagnostic yield of EPS was approximately 50% and 10% in patients with and without 
structural heart disease, respectively.
II: No 
BenefitB-NREPS is not recommended for syncope evaluation in patients with a normal ECG and normal cardiac structure and function, unless an arrhythmic etiology is suspected.
205–207
See Online Data 
Supplement 14.One prospective evaluation of 247 patients with syncope of undetermined etiology who underwent EPS found that the diagnostic yield was significantly higher in patients with an abnormal ECG than in those with a normal ECG (22% versus 3.7%) and that the 
diagnostic yield was low in patients with a normal ECG and without cardiac disease (2.6%).
206 In another small series of 34 patients 
with unexplained syncope who had normal ECGs and normal testing otherwise and who underwent EPS,205 the results were diagnostic 
in only 4 patients; the results were abnormal but not diagnostic in 2 patients and were normal in the remaining 28 patients. In another evaluation of 421 patients with undiagnosed syncope who underwent noninvasive testing as a means of predicting abnormal EPS 
findings, a normal ECG and ambulatory monitor were associated with a lower risk of EPS abnormalities than were an abnormal ECG 
and ambulatory monitor (9% versus 82%).
207
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on November 12, 2025

2017 ACC/AHA/HRS Syncope Guideline
Circulation. 2017;136:e60–e122. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000499 August 1, 2017
 e75
CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINESRecommendations for Tilt-Table Testing
COR LOE Recommendations
IIa B-RIf the diagnosis is unclear after initial evaluation, tilt-table testing can be useful for patients with suspected  
V VS.208–213
See Online Data Supplement 15.Tilt-table testing has been used to evaluate patients with syncope for nearly 3 decades.
208 It is an orthostatic stress test to 
assess the susceptibility of a vasovagal response to a postural change from a supine to an upright position. A positive response 
is defined as inducible presyncope or syncope associated with hypotension, with or without bradycardia (less commonly 
asystole). The hemodynamic response to the tilt maneuver determines whether there is a cardioinhibitory, vasodepressor, or 
mixed response.214 There is general consensus that a tilt-table angle of 70 degrees for 30 to 40 minutes would provide optimal 
yield.211,213,215 Adjunctive agents, such as a low dose of isoproterenol infusion or sublingual nitrates, may improve sensitivity but 
decrease specificity.210,212,216,217 A positive tilt-table test suggests a tendency or predisposition to V VS induced in the laboratory. This 
observation during tilt-table testing cannot necessarily define a causal etiology or be entirely conclusive of a reflex mechanism for syncope in the clinical setting. Correlation of tilt-table–induced findings to patients’ clinical presentation is critically important to 
prevent consequences of false-positive results from tilt-table testing.
The utility of tilt-table testing is highest in patients with a suspected V VS when syncope is recurrent. Several factors have reduced 
the role of tilt-table testing in the evaluation of syncope: the overall moderate sensitivity, specificity, and reproducibility of tilt-table 
testing; the presence of false-positive response in controls; the increasing recognition of V VS from a structured history taking; and 
the availability of long-term cardiac monitoring.
24,211,213
IIa B-NRTilt-table testing can be useful for patients with syncope and suspected delayed OH when initial evaluation is not diagnostic.
218,219
See Online Data 
Supplement 15.OH with standing, or a similar fall in blood pressure within 3 minutes of upright tilt-table testing to 60 degrees,220 is distinct 
from delayed OH, characterized by a sustained decrease in blood pressure occurring beyond 3 minutes of standing or upright 
tilt-table testing.220,221 Delayed OH may be responsible for syncopal episodes or symptoms of orthostatic intolerance only after 
prolonged standing. In 1 retrospective study of 230 patients with OH, only 46% had OH within 3 minutes of head-up tilt; 15% had OH between 3 and 10 minutes; and 39% had OH only after 10 minutes of tilt-table testing.
218 In 10-year follow-up 
data from 165 of these patients, 54% of individuals with delayed OH progressed to classic OH.219 The 10-year death rate  
in individuals with delayed OH was 29%, compared with 64% and 9% in individuals with baseline OH and controls, respectively.
IIa B-NR Tilt-table testing is reasonable to distinguish convulsive syncope from epilepsy in selected patients.
222–225
See Online Data 
Supplement 15.Convulsive syncope is a term that can be used to describe any form of syncope manifesting with convulsive movements (eg, myoclonus). Prolonged convulsions and marked postictal confusion are uncommon in patients with syncope associated with 
convulsive movements,
226 and fatigue is frequent after reflex syncope and may be confused with a postictal state.226 Tilt-table 
testing has been shown to be of value in this clinical setting when a detailed history cannot clearly determine whether the convulsive movements were secondary to syncope, given the need for objective evidence to help distinguish this entity from true 
epileptic seizures. In a prospective study of 15 patients with recurrent unexplained seizure-like episodes who were unresponsive to 
antiepileptic therapy,
223 67% had convulsive movements associated with hypotension and bradycardia during tilt-table testing. In 
another study of 74 patients with a questionable diagnosis of epilepsy (because of drug-refractory seizures or clinically suspected not to be true epilepsy), a cardiac diagnosis was established in 42% of patients, with >25% developing profound hypotension 
or bradycardia during the head-up tilt-table test, confirming the diagnosis of V VS.
225 Taken together, it can be estimated from 
these studies that approximately 50% of patients with either questionable or drug-refractory epilepsy have positive tilt-table tests 
suggestive of a vasovagal etiology.226
IIa B-NR Tilt-table testing is reasonable to establish a diagnosis of pseudosyncope.227–229
See Online Data 
Supplement 15.Psychogenic pseudosyncope should be suspected when patients present with frequent (even daily) symptoms that mimic V VS 
(and, in some cases, with a history of true V VS). It is often challenging to differentiate psychogenic syncope from true syncope. 
However, tilt-table testing may help to elucidate the diagnosis. During tilt-table testing, the apparent unconsciousness with loss 
of motor control, combined with normal blood pressure and heart rate (and a normal electroencephalogram [EEG] if such a 
recording is obtained), rules out true syncope and most forms of epilepsy.227–229 In 1 study of 800 patients who underwent tilt-
table testing, approximately 5% were diagnosed with pseudosyncope. Compared with patients with V VS, eye closure during the 
event, long periods of apparent transient loss of consciousness, and increased heart rate and blood pressure are highly specific for pseudosyncope. One study of 21 patients with suspected pseudosyncope who were subjected to tilt-table testing with continuous 
monitoring of the ECG, EEG, and blood pressure revealed 17 patients with non-epileptiform limb shaking without significant 
changes on an EEG or hemodynamic changes.
227
III: No 
BenefitB-RTilt-table testing is not recommended to predict a response to medical treatments for V VS.230,231
See Online Data Supplement 15.One of the purported advantages of tilt-table testing, in addition to suggesting a diagnosis of V VS, is the ability to assess the 
efficacy of pharmacological therapeutics in suppressing a vasovagal response to postural stress by evaluating the effectiveness of a therapy during repeated testing.
230,231 Several small studies suggested a possible benefit, but these data were limited by the lack of 
reproducibility of tilt-table testing.232–2353.2.6. Tilt-Table Testing: Recommendations
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on November 12, 2025

Shen et al
August 1, 2017 Circulation. 2017;136:e60–e122. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000499 e76
3.3. Neurological Testing: 
Recommendations
3.3.1. Autonomic Evaluation: Recommendation
Syncope due to neurogenic OH is common in patients with central or peripheral autonomic nervous system 
damage or dysfunction. Its causes should be sought 
so as to provide efficient, accurate, and effective man-agement. Some symptoms of neurogenic OH may dif-fer from those due to dehydration, drugs, and cardiac and reflex syncope; these include persistent and often 
progressive generalized weakness, fatigue, visual blur -
ring, cognitive slowing, leg buckling, and the “coat hanger” headache (a triangular headache at the base of the neck due to trapezius ischemia). These symp-toms may be provoked or exacerbated by exertion, prolonged standing, meals, or increased ambient temperature. Confirmation of specific neurogenic OH conditions causing syncope often requires additional 
autonomic evaluation.Table 7. Examples of Serious Medical Conditions That Might Warrant Consideration of Further Evaluation and 
Therapy in a Hospital Setting
Cardiac Arrhythmic ConditionsCardiac or Vascular  
Nonarrhythmic Conditions Noncardiac Conditions
Sustained or symptomatic VT
Symptomatic conduction system disease or Mobitz II or 
third-degree heart block
Symptomatic bradycardia or sinus pauses not related to 
neurally mediated syncope
Symptomatic SVT
Pacemaker/ICD malfunction
Inheritable cardiovascular conditions predisposing to 
arrhythmiasCardiac ischemia
Severe aortic stenosis
Cardiac tamponadeHCM
Severe prosthetic valve dysfunction
Pulmonary embolism
Aortic dissection
Acute HFModerate-to-severe LV dysfunctionSevere anemia/gastrointestinal bleeding
Major traumatic injury due to syncope
Persistent vital sign abnormalities
HCM indicates hypertrophic cardiomyopathy; HF, heart failure; ICD, implantable cardioverter-defibrillator; LV, left ventricular; SVT, supraventricular tachycardia; 
and VT, ventricular tachycardia.
Recommendation for Autonomic Evaluation
COR LOE Recommendation
IIa C-LDReferral for autonomic evaluation can be useful to improve diagnostic and prognostic accuracy in selected patients 
with syncope and known or suspected neurodegenerative disease.219,236–239
See Online Data 
Supplement 16.The care of patients with neurogenic OH is complex, especially in individuals with neurodegenerative disease. Care providers 
must be knowledgeable in the pathophysiology of the autonomic nervous system and the pharmacology of treatments for 
neurodegenerative disease.33,240 Many symptomatic treatments for neurodegenerative disease will increase the risk of syncope 
due to worsening OH; selection of these treatments needs to be balanced against the increased morbidity of not treating 
the symptoms of the neurodegenerative disease. Such care may be provided by a neurologist, cardiologist, internist, or other 
physician who has sufficient training to treat these complicated patients.
Syncope due to neurogenic OH is caused by either central or peripheral autonomic nervous system damage or dysfunction. 
Central autonomic degenerative disorders include multiple system atrophy,241 Parkinson’s disease,242 and Lewy Body dementia.238 
Peripheral autonomic dysfunction may be due to a selective degeneration of peripheral autonomic neurons, known as pure 
autonomic failure,243 or may accompany autonomic peripheral neuropathies, such as neuropathies due to diabetes amyloidosis, 
immune-mediated neuropathies, hereditary sensory and autonomic neuropathies, and inflammatory neuropathies. Peripheral neuropathies due to vitamin B
12 deficiency, neurotoxic exposure, HIV and other infections, and porphyria are less common causes 
of neurogenic OH.240
It can be useful to consider referring patients with the following characteristics for autonomic evaluation: Parkinsonism241,244–246 
or other central nervous system features,247,248 peripheral neuropathies,240 underlying diseases known to be associated with 
a peripheral neuropathy,240,248 progressive autonomic dysfunction without central or peripheral nervous system features,243,248 
postprandial hypotension,248,249 and known or suspected neuropathic postural tachycardia syndrome (POTS).37,248,250 Autonomic 
evaluation may: 1) determine the underlying cause of neurogenic OH; 2) provide prognostic information; and 3) have therapeutic implications.
3.3.2. Neurological and Imaging Diagnostics: 
RecommendationsMany patients undergo extensive neurological investiga-tion after an uncomplicated syncope event, despite the ab-sence of neurological features on history or examination. A systematic review found that EEG, CT, MRI, and carotid ul-trasound were ordered in 11% to 58% of patients with a presentation of syncope.
78 The evidence suggests that rou-
tine neurological testing is of very limited value in the con-text of syncope evaluation and management; the diagnos-tic yield is low, with very high cost per diagnosis.
36,77,78,251–260 
The recommendations pertain to the use of these investi-gations in patients with syncope and not in patients in the wider category of transient loss of consciousness.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on November 12, 2025

2017 ACC/AHA/HRS Syncope Guideline
Circulation. 2017;136:e60–e122. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000499 August 1, 2017
 e77
CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINES
Figure 3. Additional Evaluation and Diagnosis for Syncope. Colors correspond to Class of Recommendation in Table 1.  
*Applies to patients after a normal initial evaluation without significant injury or cardiovascular morbidities; patients followed up by primary care physician as needed. †In selected patients (see Section 1.4). CT indicates computed tomography; CV, 
cardiovascular; ECG, electrocardiogram; EPS, electrophysiological study; MRI, magnetic resonance imaging; OH, orthostatic 
hypotension; and TTE, transthoracic echocardiography.Recommendations for Neurological Diagnostics
COR LOE Recommendations
IIa C-LDSimultaneous monitoring of an EEG and hemodynamic parameters during tilt-table testing can be useful to distinguish 
among syncope, pseudosyncope, and epilepsy.229,261–263
See Online Data 
Supplement 16.Although a thoughtful and detailed history usually suffices to distinguish among convulsive syncope, epileptic convulsions, and pseudosyncope, an EEG is particularly important when a diagnosis cannot be established after a thorough initial evaluation. EEG 
findings are characteristic if an episode can be induced during the tilt-table testing.
261–263 Epileptiform discharges are recorded 
during epileptic convulsions whereas, during syncope, an EEG generally shows diffuse brainwave slowing with delta waves and a flat line pattern.
263 Pseudosyncope and psychogenic nonepileptic seizures are associated with a normal EEG.229
III: No 
BenefitB-NRMRI and CT of the head are not recommended in the routine evaluation of patients with syncope in the absence of 
focal neurological findings or head injury that support further evaluation.78,260
See Online Data Supplement 16.Syncope is due to global cerebral hypoperfusion, and brain structural abnormalities are rare. Nonetheless, MRI and CT are frequently used 
and infrequently helpful. In 5 studies investigating patients with syncope, MRI was used in 11% of 397 patients and established a diagnosis 
in only 0.24%. Similarly, in 10 studies of investigation of syncope, CT was used in 57% of 2728 patients and established a diagnosis in only 1%.
77,78,256,257,260 Given the cost and impact on health service facilities, MRI and CT should not be routinely used in the assessment 
of syncope. Neurological imaging may be indicated if significant head injury as a result of syncope is suspected. Although there is general 
concern about potential radiation-mediated harm from CT, there are very limited data on the actual harm from CT for syncope evaluation.
III: No 
BenefitB-NRCarotid artery imaging is not recommended in the routine evaluation of patients with syncope in the absence of focal 
neurological findings that support further evaluation.77,78,256,257,260
See Online Data Supplement 16.Syncope is due to global cerebral hypoperfusion and therefore not to unilateral ischemia. A review of 5 studies of carotid 
artery ultrasound and Doppler use in patients with syncope found that these modalities were used in 58% of 551 patients and 
established a diagnosis in 0.5%.
77,78,256,257,260 Carotid artery ultrasound should not be routinely used in the assessment of syncope.
III: No 
BenefitB-NRRoutine recording of an EEG is not recommended in the evaluation of patients with syncope in the absence of specific neurological features suggestive of a seizure.
36,77,254–258
See Online Data Supplement 16.EEGs are ordered frequently for the evaluation of syncope. A review of 7 studies of use of an EEG in patients with syncope found 
that it was used in 52% of 2084 patients and established a diagnosis in 0.7%.
36,77,254–258 EEGs should not be routinely used in the 
assessment of syncope.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on November 12, 2025

Shen et al
August 1, 2017 Circulation. 2017;136:e60–e122. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000499 e78
4. MANAGEMENT OF 
CARDIOVASCULAR CONDITIONS
The writing committee reviewed the evidence to sup-
port recommendations in the relevant ACC/AHA guide-lines and affirms the ongoing validity of the related recommendations in the context of syncope, thus obvi-ating the need to repeat existing guideline recommen-dations in the present guideline, except for the specific cardiac conditions in Sections 4.2.4, 4.2.5, and 4.3 for which ACC/AHA guidelines are not available. The rel-
evant guidelines are noted in Table 2.
It is pertinent to note that the principles of evalu-
ation and management of syncope in patients with 
various cardiac conditions are the same as for other noncardiac conditions. A thorough history, physical ex-amination, and baseline ECG are recommended in all 
patients. The determination of the immediate cause of 
syncope may be related, indirectly related, or unrelated to the underlying cardiac condition. Management of Table 8. Cardiac Rhythm Monitors
Types of Monitor Device Description Patient Selection
Holter monitor151–153A portable, battery-operated device
Continuous recording for 24–72 h; up to 2 wk with newer 
models
Symptom rhythm correlation can be achieved through a 
patient event diary and patient-activated annotationsSymptoms frequent enough to be detected within a short 
period (24–72 h) of monitoring*
Patient-activated, transtelephonic monitor (event 
monitor)
150,154,155A recording device that transmits patient-activated data 
(live or stored) via an analog phone line to a central remote 
monitoring station (eg, physician office)Frequent, spontaneous symptoms likely to recur within 
2–6 wk
Limited use in patients with frank syncope associated 
with sudden incapacitation
External loop recorder (patient 
or auto triggered)†150,154,155A device that continuously records and stores rhythm data 
over weeks to months
Patient activated, or auto triggered (eg, to record 
asymptomatic arrhythmias) to provide a recording of events 
antecedent to (3–14 min), during, and after (1–4 min) the 
triggered event
Newer models are equipped with a cellular phone, which 
transmits triggered data automatically over a wireless 
network to a remote monitoring systemFrequent, spontaneous symptoms related to syncope, 
likely to recur within 2–6 wk
External patch recorders157–159Patch device that continuously records and stores rhythm data, with patient-trigger capability to allow for symptom-
rhythm correlation
No leads or wires, and adhesive to chest wall/sternum
Various models record from 2–14 d
Offers accurate means of assessing burden of atrial 
fibrillation
Patient activated, or auto triggered (eg, to record 
asymptomatic arrhythmias) to provide a recording of 
events antecedent to, during, and after the triggered 
eventCan be considered as an alternative to external loop 
recorder
Given that it is leadless, can be accurately self-applied, 
and is largely water resistant, it may be more comfortable 
and less cumbersome than an external loop recorder, 
potentially improving compliance
Unlike Holter monitors and other external monitors, it 
offers only 1-lead recording
Mobile cardiac outpatient 
telemetry
160,161Device that records and transmits data (up to 30 d) from 
preprogrammed arrhythmias or patient activation to a 
communication hub at the patient’s home
Significant arrhythmias are detected; the monitor 
automatically transmits the patient’s ECG data through a 
wireless network to the central monitoring station, which is 
attended by trained technicians 24 h/d
This offers the potential for real-time, immediate feedback to 
a healthcare provider for evaluationSpontaneous symptoms related to syncope and rhythm 
correlation
In high-risk patients whose rhythm requires real-time 
monitoring
Implantable cardiac 
monitor162,167,179–181Subcutaneously implanted device, with a battery life  
of 2–3 y
Triggered by the patient (or often family member witness) to 
store the event
Models allow for transtelephonic transmission, as well as 
automatic detection of significant arrhythmias with remote 
monitoringRecurrent, infrequent, unexplained syncope (or suspected atypical reflex syncope) of suspected arrhythmic cause 
after a nondiagnostic initial workup, with or without 
structural heart disease
*Includes history, physical examination, and 12-lead ECG; may include nondiagnostic tilt-table test or electrophysiological study.
†Higher yield in patients who are able to record a diary to correlate with possible arrhythmia.
ECG indicates electrocardiogram.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on November 12, 2025

2017 ACC/AHA/HRS Syncope Guideline
Circulation. 2017;136:e60–e122. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000499 August 1, 2017
 e79
CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINESpatients with syncope and heart disease would include 
treating the immediate cause of syncope and further assessing long-term management strategies to improve prognosis. The recommendations stated in this section focus on syncope relevant to and within the context of the specific stated cardiac condition.
4.1. Arrhythmic Conditions: 
Recommendations
Cardiac arrhythmia is a common cause of syncope, and 
the prompt identification of an arrhythmic etiology has diagnostic and prognostic implications. When bradyar -rhythmias and tachyarrhythmias are discovered in patients 
with syncope, determining their causal relationship to 
syncope often poses challenges for the practitioner. The 
baseline presence of an arrhythmia does not necessarily represent the etiology of syncope (eg, marked resting bra-
dycardia in a young patient with syncope). Furthermore, 
determining the significance of atrial tachyarrhythmias and VT—which are often paroxysmal and occult on initial 
evaluation—poses additional challenges and may war -
rant a more extensive evaluation (Section 3.2). Section 4.1 broadly outlines strategies to guide the practitioner 
when evaluating patients with bradycardia, supraven-tricular arrhythmias (including AF), and VT.
4.1.1. Bradycardia: Recommendation
Recommendation for Bradycardia
COR LOE Recommendation
I C-EO In patients with syncope associated with bradycardia, GDMT is recommended.12
N/AA search and review of papers on syncope and bradycardia has been performed since the last updated guidelines were published 
in 2012.12 The writing committee supports the previous recommendations pertaining to syncope in patients with sinus node 
dysfunction and AV conduction diseases. In adult patients presenting with syncope and chronic bifascicular block but without 
documented high-degree AV block, for whom other causes have been excluded, an RCT265 showed that a dual-chamber pacemaker 
reduced recurrent syncope. The evidence continues to support, without change from the previous recommendation, the notion that permanent pacemaker implantation is reasonable for syncope in patients with chronic bifascicular block when other causes have 
been excluded.
The use of adenosine triphosphate in the evaluation of syncope in older patients continues to evolve. In a small, single-blind trial  
of older patients (mean age 75 years) randomized to active pacing or back-up pacing with documented adenosine triphosphate–
sensitive sinoatrial or AV block, there was a 75% risk reduction in syncope recurrence with dual-chamber pacing.
266 Adenosine 
triphosphate is not available in the United States. The writing committee has reached a consensus not to make a new recommendation on its use for syncope evaluation because of the limited data at this time.
4.1.2. Supraventricular Tachycardia: Recommendations
Recommendations for Supraventricular Tachycardia (SVT)
COR LOE Recommendations
I C-EO In patients with syncope and SVT, GDMT is recommended.10
N/AAlthough patients with SVT frequently manifest palpitations and lightheadedness, syncope is uncommon. Of note, older 
patients with paroxysmal SVT are more prone to syncope or near-syncope than are younger patients; these symptoms 
appear to be independent of the rate of tachycardia, which is generally slower in older adult patients than in younger 
patients.267,268 Younger patients with SVT causing syncope generally have a very rapid tachycardia. Evaluation of syncope 
in patients with Wolff-Parkinson-White syndrome with preexcitation on ECG requires a thorough history to differentiate 
an arrhythmic syncope from a nonarrhythmic syncope, such as V VS, in younger patients.269 When a patient with syncope 
reports antecedent palpitations and lightheadedness, VT should be more strongly suspected than SVT. EPS may be useful to distinguish a VT from an SVT responsible for syncope associated with these antecedent symptoms. It should be noted 
that palpitations can also precede vasovagal faints due to sinus tachycardia, so not all palpitations are necessarily due to 
paroxysmal SVT or VT.
I C-EO In patients with AF, GDMT is recommended.
16
N/AAF can be associated with syncope. As with other forms of SVT, syncope from a rapid ventricular response (in the absence  
of preexcitation) is relatively unusual. Patients with chronic AF merit control of the ventricular response or maintenance of  
sinus rhythm with appropriate antiarrhythmic therapy (in carefully selected patients).16 Patients with paroxysmal AF are 
predisposed to an abnormal neural response during both sinus rhythm and arrhythmia, and the onset of AF may trigger  
V VS.270 In patients with sinus node dysfunction, syncope could occur upon termination of AF when prolonged pauses  
are present.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on November 12, 2025

Shen et al
August 1, 2017 Circulation. 2017;136:e60–e122. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000499 e80
4.2. Structural Conditions: 
Recommendations
Syncope occurs not infrequently in patients with un-
derlying heart diseases. Comprehensive guidelines ex-ist for diagnosis and management of many of these 
diseases, including sections on syncope. In this sec-
tion, management of syncope is discussed in patients with underlying structural heart disease. The disease-
specific ACC/AHA guidelines were assessed first, and 
then a comprehensive review of literature published 
since publication of these disease-specific guidelines was performed to ensure that prior recommendations about syncope remained current. If new published data were available, they were incorporated into the present document.4.1.3. Ventricular Arrhythmia: Recommendation
Recommendation for VA
COR LOE Recommendation
I C-EO In patients with syncope and VA, GDMT is recommended.12,13,220,264,271
N/APatients with VA (monomorphic or polymorphic) can present with syncope, whether it is nonsustained or sustained. The 
mechanism of syncope from VA is multifactorial, including: rapid rate, abrupt change in rate, abnormal atrial and ventricular 
activation relationships, dyssynchrony of ventricular activation, changes in autonomic tone, and body position during the VA.272 
One study of 113 patients with sustained VA showed that patients who had a mean VA rate of ≥ 200 bpm had a 65% incidence 
of syncope or near-syncope, compared with only 15% among patients with a rate <200 bpm.273 Of the patients with VA ≥ 200 
bpm, 34% did not experience syncope or presyncope. The risk of recurrent syncope and the overall long-term prognosis of patients with VA depend on the severity of the underlying cardiac disease substrates. Indications for ICDs in patients with syncope 
and suspected VA are predicated on the documentation of or the risk of developing lethal VA.
12
4.2.1. Ischemic and Nonischemic Cardiomyopathy: Recommendation
Recommendation for Ischemic and Nonischemic Cardiomyopathy
COR LOE Recommendation
I C-EO In patients with syncope associated with ischemic and nonischemic cardiomyopathy, GDMT is recommended.12,13
N/AEvaluation of syncope in patients with ischemic and nonischemic cardiomyopathy encompasses diagnosis and prognosis. Treatment of syncope is based on the specific cause of syncope, whereas treatment for the underlying cardiomyopathy impacts the long-
term prognosis. A review of evidence supports previously published recommendations for patients with syncope in the presence 
of underlying cardiomyopathy. An ICD is recommended in patients with syncope of undetermined origin with clinically relevant 
and significant VA induced at the time of an EPS.
28 ICD therapy is also reasonable for patients with unexplained syncope and 
nonischemic dilated cardiomyopathy with significant LV dysfunction.12,13,28
4.2.2. Valvular Heart Disease: Recommendation
Recommendation for Valvular Heart Disease
COR LOE Recommendation
I C-EO In patients with syncope associated with valvular heart disease, GDMT is recommended.11
N/APatients with aortic stenosis may experience syncope during exertion. The mechanism is often hemodynamic, as opposed to arrhythmic, because of inability to augment and sustain cardiac output. In patients with valvular heart disease causing syncope, 
treatment is recommended by the latest guidelines.
11 Specifically, aortic valve replacement is recommended in patients with severe 
aortic stenosis and syncope after other causes of syncope are also considered and excluded.
4.2.3. Hypertrophic Cardiomyopathy: Recommendation
Recommendation for HCM
COR LOE Recommendation
I C-EO In patients with syncope associated with HCM, GDMT is recommended.20
N/AA MEDLINE search and review of papers on syncope and HCM has been performed since the last guideline was published in 2011.
20 There are no new data that would alter the 2011 recommendations. Thus, the writing committee supports the previous 
recommendations pertaining to syncope in patients with HCM. Although there are no randomized trials, data from registries have 
shown consistently that unexplained syncope is an independent predictor for SCD and appropriate ICD discharges. The present 
writing committee concurs that ICD implantation is reasonable in patients with HCM presenting with ≥1 recent episodes of syncope 
suspected to be of arrhythmic nature.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on November 12, 2025

2017 ACC/AHA/HRS Syncope Guideline
Circulation. 2017;136:e60–e122. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000499 August 1, 2017
 e81
CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINES4.2.4. Arrhythmogenic Right Ventricular Cardiomyopathy: Recommendations
Recommendations for ARVC
COR LOE Recommendations
I B-NRICD implantation is recommended in patients with ARVC who present with syncope and have a documented  
sustained VA.274–278
See Online Data 
Supplement 17.ICD indications in patients with ARVC and sustained VA are no different than guidelines-based indications for secondary prevention of SCD in other diseases.
12
IIa B-NRICD implantation is reasonable in patients with ARVC who present with syncope of suspected arrhythmic 
etiology.274,275,277–279
See Online Data 
Supplement 17.Unexplained or arrhythmic-appearing syncope in patients with ARVC has consistently been associated with increased risk of SCD or appropriate therapy after ICD implantation in multiple observational studies.
274–279
4.2.5. Cardiac Sarcoidosis: Recommendations
Recommendations for Cardiac Sarcoidosis
COR LOE Recommendations
I B-NRICD implantation is recommended in patients with cardiac sarcoidosis presenting with syncope and documented spontaneous sustained VA.
12,280–286
See Online Data Supplement 18.ICD indications in patients with cardiac sarcoidosis and sustained VA are no different than guidelines- or consensus-based indications for secondary prevention of SCD.
12,286 Macroreentry around the granulomas is the most common mechanism of VA in patients with 
cardiac sarcoidosis.280,281 Other mechanisms include triggered activity and abnormal automaticity due to myocardial inflammation.282 
Unlike AV block, the results of immunosuppression in patients with VA are controversial. Some studies have shown improvement with 
immunosuppression,283 whereas others have shown no benefit and even harm due to worsening VA and aneurysm formation.284,285
I C-EOIn patients with cardiac sarcoidosis presenting with syncope and conduction abnormalities, GDMT is recommended.
12,286–289
See Online Data 
Supplement 18.Patients with cardiac sarcoidosis and conduction abnormalities should be treated according to the most recent guidelines for cardiac pacing.
12 Patients with cardiac sarcoidosis and conduction abnormalities have a worse prognosis than that of patients with idiopathic AV 
block.286,287 Immunosuppression can result in transient reversal of AV block; however, the reversibility is unpredictable.287–289 As such, it is 
recommended to proceed with pacing according to the most recent guidelines regardless of AV block reversibility.
IIa B-NRICD implantation is reasonable in patients with cardiac sarcoidosis and syncope of suspected arrhythmic origin, 
particularly with LV dysfunction or pacing indication.290–293
See Online Data 
Supplement 18.The presence of myocardial noncaseating granulomas and inflammation puts patients at risk of having both AV block and VA, particularly in the presence of LV dysfunction. Patients with cardiac sarcoidosis and mild-to-moderate LV dysfunction have a 
substantial risk of developing VA.
290–293 In a multicenter study including 235 patients with cardiac sarcoidosis who received ICD 
therapy for primary or secondary prevention, including patients with syncope, 36% of patients received appropriate ICD therapy. Patients who received appropriate ICD therapies were more likely to be male and to have a history of syncope, lower LV ejection 
fraction, ventricular pacing on baseline ECG, and a secondary prevention indication than were those who did not receive appropriate 
ICD therapies.
292 Therefore, given the presence of a substrate for VA in patients with cardiac sarcoidosis, ICD implantation is 
reasonable in patients presenting with syncope suspected to be of arrhythmic origin.
IIa B-NR EPS is reasonable in patients with cardiac sarcoidosis and syncope of suspected arrhythmic etiology.294
See Online Data 
Supplement 18.In patients with cardiac sarcoidosis, programmed electrical stimulation may help identify patients at risk of having VA. According 
to a study of 76 patients with cardiac sarcoidosis and no cardiac symptoms, 8 (11%) had inducible sustained VA. During a median 
follow-up of 5 years, 6 of 8 had VA or died, versus 1 of 68 in the noninducible group.294
4.3. Inheritable Arrhythmic Conditions: 
Recommendations
The prevalence of inherited arrhythmic conditions is low, 
rendering the clinical significance of an abnormal test 
a challenge. Few syncope-specific studies exist. Most 
studies of patients with inherited arrhythmias are open label or not randomized and often are uncontrolled. 
Most of the publications included other cardiac events, 
such as cardiac arrest and death, either at enrollment or as an outcome. Syncope of suspected arrhythmic cause has been correlated with increased risk of SCD, 
cardiac arrest, or overall cardiac death. Although ICD 
is effective in aborting cardiac arrest and presumably reducing risk of death in the patients with inheritable 
rhythm disorders, its impact on syncope recurrence is unknown.
25,26,220
4.3.1. Brugada Syndrome: RecommendationsBrugada syndrome is defined as a genetic disease char -
acterized by an increased risk of SCD and ST elevation with type 1 morphology ≥ 2 mm in ≥ 1 lead among the 
right precordial leads V1 and V2, occurring either spon-taneously or after intravenous administration of Class I antiarrhythmic drugs. The prevalence is higher in Asian countries than in North America or Western Europe, 
ranging from 0.01% to 1.00%, with a significant male 
predominance.
295
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on November 12, 2025

Shen et al
August 1, 2017 Circulation. 2017;136:e60–e122. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000499 e82
Recommendations for Brugada ECG Pattern and Syncope
COR LOE Recommendations
IIa B-NR ICD implantation is reasonable in patients with Brugada ECG pattern and syncope of suspected arrhythmic etiology.296–300
See Online Data 
Supplement 19.Syncope is a risk factor for cardiac arrhythmic events in patients with Brugada syndrome.296,297 ICD implantation is reasonable in 
these patients; however, the benefit seems to be limited to patients with suspected arrhythmic syncope.298 Patients with syncope 
consistent with a reflex-mediated mechanism should not undergo the implantation of an ICD.
In a meta-analysis, the relative risk of cardiac events (SCD, syncope, or ICD shock) among patients with a history of syncope 
or SCD was approximately 3 times higher than among patients without a prior history of syncope or SCD.296 Data from an 
international registry showed that the cardiac event rate per year was 7.7% in patients with aborted SCD, 1.9% in patients with 
syncope, and 0.5% in asymptomatic patients.297 In a cohort including 203 patients with Brugada, VA occurred only in patients with 
syncope suspected to be arrhythmic in origin, at a rate of 5.5% per year. No SCD occurred in patients with nonarrhythmic syncope or with syncope of doubtful origin.
298
IIb B-NRInvasive EPS may be considered in patients with Brugada ECG pattern and syncope of suspected arrhythmic etiology.
297,301,302
See Online Data 
Supplement 19.The value of EPS in assessing the mechanism of syncope in patients with Brugada is unknown. In large registries of patients 
with Brugada (PRELUDE and FINGER),297,301 inducibility of VA was higher among patients with a prior history of syncope or 
SCD. However, the value of EPS in predicting prognosis in patients with Brugada is essentially unknown in patients with syncope. The role of inducibility of VA in identifying high-risk patients remains controversial.
301,302 Therefore, EPS may be 
considered only in patients with syncope suspected to be due to an arrhythmia and is not recommended in patients with reflex syncope.
III: No 
BenefitB-NRICD implantation is not recommended in patients with Brugada ECG pattern and reflex-mediated syncope in the absence of other risk factors.
303,304
See Online Data 
Supplement 19.In a retrospective multicenter study, appropriate ICD therapy was limited to survivors of cardiac arrest, whereas none of the other patients with syncope and/or inducible ventricular fibrillation (VF) suffered an arrhythmic event.
303,304 Given the lack of 
benefit of ICD therapy in patients with reflex syncope and the known rate of inappropriate shocks and ICD complications in 
patients who receive an ICD,51 ICD implantation is not recommended when the syncope mechanism is believed to be reflex 
mediated.
4.3.2. Short-QT Syndrome: Recommendation
Short-QT syndrome is a genetic disease characterized by palpitations, syncope, and increased risk of SCD, associated with a QTc interval ≤340 ms.
25,26 It is a rare 
condition. Limited data are available about its prog-nostic significance, particularly in the absence of doc-umented VA. Invasive EPS has shown increased vulner -
ability to VF induction in most patients, yet the clinical significance of this finding remains unknown.
305 Quin-
idine therapy might provide some protection against VA; however, there are insufficient data to make any recommendations.
305,306
Recommendation for Short-QT Syndrome
COR LOE Recommendation
IIb C-EO ICD implantation may be considered in patients with short-QT pattern and syncope of suspected arrhythmic etiology.
See Online Data 
Supplement 20.The prevalence of short-QT syndrome is very low, ranging from 0.02% to 1.63%.305,307–312 There is no evidence that syncope 
in patients with short-QT pattern is a risk factor for cardiac arrest in the absence of documented VT or VF. Therefore, ICD implantation may be limited to patients with suspected arrhythmic syncope, particularly in the presence of a family history  
of SCD.
306
4.3.3. Long-QT Syndrome: Recommendations
LQTS is diagnosed in the presence of QTc ≥ 500 ms 
or LQTS risk score ≥ 3.5 when secondary causes have 
been excluded or in the presence of a pathogenic mu-tation in 1 of the LQTS genes. It can also be diagnosed when the QTc is 480 to 499 ms in a patient present-ing with syncope.
25 There are several genetic forms 
of LQTS, which affect presentation and response to therapy. Given that syncope is often the result of an arrhythmic event in patients with LQTS, early recogni-tion and treatment are needed to avoid recurrences, which could present as cardiac arrest or SCD. This is particularly true in the pediatric population, where sig-nificant overlap exists in the clinical presentation of patients with V VS and arrhythmic syncope.
313,314 At-
tention to the triggers and presence of palpitations preceding syncope onset have been helpful in diag-nosing an arrhythmic etiology.
315
Patients with LQTS and syncope should adhere to the 
lifestyle changes previously published, including avoid-ance of strenuous activity in LQTS1, and drugs known to prolong QT interval in all patients with LQTS.
25
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on November 12, 2025

2017 ACC/AHA/HRS Syncope Guideline
Circulation. 2017;136:e60–e122. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000499 August 1, 2017
 e83
CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINESRecommendations for LQTS
COR LOE Recommendations
I B-NRBeta-blocker therapy, in the absence of contraindications, is indicated as a first-line therapy in patients with LQTS and 
suspected arrhythmic syncope.316–318
See Online Data Supplement 21.In the International Long QT Registry, patients who experienced ≥1 episode of syncope had a 6- to 12-fold increase in the risk of subsequent fatal/near-fatal events, independent of QTc duration. Beta-blocker therapy was associated with a significant reduction in 
the risk of recurrent syncope and subsequent fatal/near-fatal events. The response to beta blockers depends on the genotype, and 
not all beta blockers are the same.
316,319 Patients with LQTS1 appear to respond better than patients with LQTS2 and LQTS3.316,320
IIa B-NRICD implantation is reasonable in patients with LQTS and suspected arrhythmic syncope who are on beta-blocker 
therapy or are intolerant to beta-blocker therapy.317,320–324
See Online Data 
Supplement 21.Cardiac events can occur in patients receiving beta-blocker therapy, with a prevalence ranging from 10% to 32%, depending on the genotype.
316,317 Many patients who appear to not respond to beta blockers are poorly compliant or do not tolerate the 
medication.317 Therefore, ICD implantation is reasonable in patients with LQTS who continue to have syncope despite beta-blocker 
therapy and in those who cannot tolerate beta-blocker therapy. In a study of 459 patients with genetically confirmed LQTS who 
received an ICD, syncope was a predictor of appropriate therapy.322
IIa C-LDLeft cardiac sympathetic denervation (LCSD) is reasonable in patients with LQTS and recurrent syncope of suspected arrhythmic mechanism who are intolerant to beta-blocker therapy or for whom beta-blocker therapy has failed.
325–327
See Online Data 
Supplement 21.LCSD has been shown to be associated with a large and significant clinical benefit in patients with symptomatic LQTS who are either refractory or intolerant to beta-blocker therapy.
325,326 LCSD also reduces shocks in patients with an ICD during arrhythmia 
storms. Therefore, LCSD can be beneficial in patients with recurrent syncope despite beta blockade, in those who cannot tolerate 
beta-blocker therapy, and in those with frequent shocks from their ICD. However, LCSD alone does not completely prevent cardiac 
events, including SCD, during long-term follow-up.
4.3.4. Catecholaminergic Polymorphic Ventricular 
Tachycardia: RecommendationsCPVT is characterized by the presence of catecholamine-induced (often exertional) bidirectional VT or polymorphic VT in the setting of a structurally normal heart and normal resting ECG.
328,329 In patients with CPVT, 60% have a mu-tation in either the gene encoding the cardiac ryanodine receptor (RyR2) (autosomal dominant) or in the cardiac calsequestrin gene (CASQ2) (autosomal recessive).
330–333 
The prevalence of the disease is estimated to be around 0.1 per 1000 patients. Patients usually present in the first or second decade of life with stress-induced syncope.
25
Recommendations for CPVT
COR LOE Recommendations
I C-LDExercise restriction is recommended in patients with CPVT presenting with syncope of suspected arrhythmic 
etiology.328,334,335
See Online Data 
Supplements 22 and 23.The presence of VA in patients with CPVT has been shown to correlate with increases in heart rate, highlighting the role of the sympathetic nervous system in arrhythmogenesis.
328,334 Therefore, exercise restriction, including avoidance of heavy exercise and 
competitive sports, is recommended in all patients with CPVT.335
I C-LDBeta blockers lacking intrinsic sympathomimetic activity are recommended in patients with CPVT and  
stress-induced syncope.329,334,336–339
See Online Data 
Supplements 22 and 23.Beta blockers should be first-line therapy in patients with CPVT, as they have been shown to suppress exercise-induced arrhythmias. However, 
they are not always completely protective.329,334,336 The variability in outcome with beta-blocker therapy is due to multiple factors, including 
dosing and compliance.337,338 Repeat exercise testing and cardiac monitoring to document arrhythmia suppression can be reassuring.334,339
IIa C-LDFlecainide is reasonable in patients with CPVT who continue to have syncope of suspected VA despite beta-blocker therapy.
319,320
See Online Data 
Supplements 22 and 23.Despite beta-blocker therapy, breakthrough arrhythmias occur in patients with CPVT because of treatment failure, noncompliance, and 
subtherapeutic dosing. The addition of flecainide to conventional therapy has been shown to partly or completely suppress exercise-
induced VA.340 In patients intolerant of beta-blocker therapy, flecainide is useful as monotherapy.341
IIa B-NRICD therapy is reasonable in patients with CPVT and a history of exercise- or stress-induced syncope despite use of optimal 
medical therapy or LCSD.271,342,343
See Online Data 
Supplements 22 and 23.ICD therapy appears to reduce mortality rate in patients with CPVT and syncope or VA refractory to medical therapy. However, VT 
storms in patients with CPVT may not always respond to ICD shocks,344 and shocks may precipitate early recurrence of arrhythmia 
because of their painful nature with resultant adrenergic state. Furthermore, the effectiveness of ICD shock therapy in CPVT depends on the mechanism of the VA, with greater success noted when shocks are delivered for VF.
345 ICD implantation should be performed in 
conjunction with beta-blocker therapy or LCSD when available.342 Careful programming, including long detection intervals with high 
cutoff rate, is recommended to decrease the prevalence of inappropriate shocks.342,343
IIb C-LDIn patients with CPVT who continue to experience syncope or VA, verapamil with or without beta-blocker therapy may be considered.
346,347
See Online Data 
Supplements 22 and 23.Verapamil alone or in combination with beta blockers helps suppress arrhythmias in patients with CPVT,347 including delaying the onset 
of exercise-induced ventricular ectopy.346,347
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on November 12, 2025

Shen et al
August 1, 2017 Circulation. 2017;136:e60–e122. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000499 e84
4.3.5. Early Repolarization Pattern: 
RecommendationsEarly repolarization pattern is characterized by a distinct J point and ST elevation in the lateral or inferolateral leads. The pattern is more prevalent in young athletes, particularly African Americans, with 70% of the subjects being male.
351 Early repolarization ECG pattern (>1 mm) 
in the inferior/lateral leads occurs in 1% to 13% of the general population and in 15% to 70% of idiopathic VF cases.
352–354 Furthermore, it has been shown in popula-
tion-based studies to be associated with increased risk of cardiac death.
352,353,355–357 One study showed that the pres-
ence of a J wave increased the risk of VF from 3.4/100 000 
to 11.0/100 000.353 However, given the low incidence of 
VF in the general population, the absolute risk in patients with early repolarization remains low. In patients with syn-cope, the clinical significance of the early repolarization pattern is unknown.
Recommendations for Early Repolarization Pattern
COR LOE Recommendations
IIb C-EOICD implantation may be considered in patients with early repolarization pattern and suspected arrhythmic syncope in 
the presence of a family history of early repolarization pattern with cardiac arrest.
N/AICD implantation may be considered in patients with early repolarization pattern and suspected cardiac syncope if they have a family 
history of unexplained SCD, VF, or polymorphic VT with documented early repolarization pattern in the affected family member.358,359
III: Harm B-NREPS should not be performed in patients with early repolarization pattern and history of syncope in the absence of 
other indications.359
See Online Data 
Supplement 24.In a multicenter study including 81 patients with early repolarization syndrome and aborted SCD who underwent EPS, VF was inducible in only 22% of cases. The VF recurrence rate was similar in patients who were inducible and in those who were 
noninducible.
359 Given the high prevalence of early repolarization, the possibility of inducing VF in healthy individuals, and 
the limited value of ventricular programmed stimulation in risk stratification, EPS is not recommended in patients with early repolarization and syncope in the absence of other cardiac indications.
352,353,360
5. REFLEX CONDITIONS: 
RECOMMENDATIONS
5.1. Vasovagal Syncope: Recommendations
V VS is the most common cause of syncope and a fre-
quent reason for ED visits.66 The underlying pathophys-
iology of V VS results from a reflex causing hypoten-
sion and bradycardia, triggered by prolonged standing 
or exposure to emotional stress, pain, or medical pro-cedures.
361–365 An episode of V VS is typically associated 
with a prodrome of diaphoresis, warmth, and pallor, with fatigue after the event. Given the benign nature of V VS and its frequent remissions, medical treatment 
is usually not required unless conservative measures 
are unsatisfactory. In some patients, effective treat-
ment is needed, as syncopal events may result in in-jury and an impaired quality of life (QoL).
366–368 Despite 
the need and substantial efforts by investigators, there 
are limited evidence-based therapeutic options.369 Pre-
liminary data from cardiac ganglia plexi ablation in treating selected patients with V VS are encouraging 
but still insufficient to make recommendations at this 
time.
370–372 See Figure  4 for the algorithm for treat-
ment of V VS.
Recommendations for V VS
COR LOE Recommendations
I C-EO Patient education on the diagnosis and prognosis of V VS is recommended.
See Online Data 
Supplements 25 and 26.In all patients with the common faint or V VS, an explanation of the diagnosis, education targeting awareness of and possible 
avoidance of triggers (eg, prolonged standing, warm environments, coping with dental and medical settings), and reassurance about the benign nature of the condition should be provided.
IIa B-R Physical counter-pressure maneuvers can be useful in patients with V VS who have a sufficiently long prodromal period.
373–375
See Online Data Supplements 25 and 26.Patients with a syncope prodrome should be instructed to assume a supine position to prevent a faint and minimize possible injury. In patients with a sufficiently long prodrome, physical counter-maneuvers (eg, leg crossing, limb and/or abdominal contraction, squatting) are a core management strategy. In a randomized, parallel, open-label trial, leg crossing with conventional therapy (ie, fluid, salt 
intake, counseling, and avoidance) was superior to conventional therapy in preventing syncope recurrence.
375IIb C-LD LCSD may be reasonable in patients with CPVT, syncope, and symptomatic VA despite optimal medical therapy.348–350
See Online Data 
Supplements 22 and 23.When syncope occurs despite optimal medical therapy, LCSD may be a reasonable therapy.348–350 In a worldwide cohort study, the 
percentage of patients with major cardiac events despite optimal medical therapy was reduced 68% after LCSD.349Recommendations for CPVT (Continued)
COR LOE Recommendations
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on November 12, 2025

2017 ACC/AHA/HRS Syncope Guideline
Circulation. 2017;136:e60–e122. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000499 August 1, 2017
 e85
CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINES5.2. Pacemakers in Vasovagal Syncope: 
Recommendation
Pacemakers might seem to be an obvious therapy for 
V VS, given that bradycardia and asystole are present 
during some spells. Numerous observational studies and RCTs have assessed whether pacemakers are ef-ficacious in preventing syncope.
404–409 It is becoming 
clear that strict patient selection on the basis of docu-mented asystole during clinical syncope is important, and that observation combined with a tilt-table test that induces minimal or no vasodepressor response 
may increase the likelihood of a response to pacing. This is because a positive tilt-table test might identify 
patients who are likely to also have a vasodepressor 
response during V VS and therefore not respond as 
well to permanent pacing. As noted in Section 1.1, the recommendation in this section was based on a sepa-
rately commissioned systematic review of the available 
evidence, the results of which were used to frame our decision making. Full details are provided in the ERC’s 
systematic review report.
9
Recommendation for Pacemakers in V VS
COR LOE Recommendation
IIb B-RSRDual-chamber pacing might be reasonable in a select population of patients 40 years of age or older with recurrent 
V VS and prolonged spontaneous pauses.404–408,410
See Online Data Supplements 27 and 28.Among patients with a positive tilt-table test, a benefit of pacing for treatment of recurrent syncope was evident as compared with 
medical or no therapy in open-label trials,
52,404,406,410–412 but this result must be interpreted with caution because of the possibility 
of outcome ascertainment bias. In 2 RCTs, there was no statistically significant benefit seen with active pacing.407,408 However, in a 
select population of patients >40 years of age with recurrent syncope and documented spontaneous pauses ≥3 seconds correlated with syncope or an asymptomatic pause ≥6 seconds, dual-chamber pacing reduced syncope recurrence. There was less benefit in 
patients with a positive tilt-table test that induced a vasodepressor response.
405
SR indicates systematic review.IIa B-R Midodrine is reasonable in patients with recurrent V VS with no history of hypertension, HF, or urinary retention.376–380
See Online Data Supplements 25 and 26.Midodrine is a prodrug that is metabolized to desglymidodrine, which is a peripherally active alpha-agonist used to ameliorate the reduction in peripheral sympathetic neural outflow responsible for venous pooling and vasodepression in V VS. Studies on the 
efficacy of midodrine support its use. In a meta-analysis of 5 RCTs in adults and children, midodrine was associated with a 43% 
reduction in syncope recurrence.
318,376,378,379,381
IIb B-R The usefulness of orthostatic training is uncertain in patients with frequent V VS.382–386
See Online Data 
Supplements 25 and 26.There are 2 main methods of orthostatic training. Patients undergo repetitive tilt-table tests in a monitored setting until a negative tilt-table test occurs and then are encouraged to stand quietly against a wall for 30 to 60 minutes daily, or patients simply standing quietly against a wall at home for a prolonged period of time daily. RCTs have not shown a sustained benefit in reducing episodes 
of syncope recurrence with either option.
382,383,385,387
IIb B-RFludrocortisone might be reasonable for patients with recurrent V VS and inadequate response to salt and fluid intake, 
unless contraindicated.388,389
See Online Data 
Supplements 25 and 26.Fludrocortisone has mineralocorticoid activity resulting in sodium and water retention and potassium excretion, which results in increased blood volume. In a pediatric population, an RCT found more recurrent symptoms in the fludrocortisone arm than in the 
placebo arm.
389 Serum potassium level should be monitored because of potential drug-induced hypokalemia. POST II (Prevention 
of Syncope Trial II) reported a marginally insignificant 31% risk reduction in adults with moderately frequent V VS, which was 
significant in patients after a 2-week dose stabilization period.388
IIb B-NR Beta blockers might be reasonable in patients 42 years of age or older with recurrent V VS.390–393
See Online Data 
Supplements 25 and 26.RCTs on the efficacy and effectiveness of beta blockers for the prevention of syncope have been negative.64,390–393 However, in a 
meta-analysis of a prespecified, prestratified substudy of POST I and a large observational study, an age-dependent benefit of beta 
blockers among patients ≥42 years of age was found, compared with those of younger age.394,395
IIb C-LD Encouraging increased salt and fluid intake may be reasonable in selected patients with V VS, unless contraindicated.396–399
N/AEvidence for the effectiveness of salt and fluid intake for patients with V  VS is limited. Nonetheless, in patients with recurrent V  VS and 
no clear contraindication, such as a history of hypertension, renal disease, HF, or cardiac dysfunction, it may be reasonable to encourage ingestion of 2 to 3 L of fluid per day and a total of 6 to 9 g (100 to 150 mmol) of salt per day, or about 1 to 2 heaping teaspoonfuls. 
The long-term balance of risks and benefits of a strategy of increasing salt and water intake is unknown.
IIb C-LDIn selected patients with V VS, it may be reasonable to reduce or withdraw medications that cause hypotension when 
appropriate.
400
N/AA careful examination of the patient’s history for medications that may lower blood pressure (hypotensive agents) should be performed. Care 
should be taken to withdraw or reduce medications only where safe to do so and in conjunction with the prescribing healthcare provider.
IIb C-LD In patients with recurrent V VS, a selective serotonin reuptake inhibitor might be considered.393,401,402
See Online Data 
Supplements 25 and 26.Serotonin has central neurophysiological effects on blood pressure and heart rate and acutely induces syncope during tilt-table 
testing.403 Three small RCTs on selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors have been conducted on the effectiveness of fluoxetine and 
paroxetine in preventing syncope, with contradictory evidence of effectiveness.393,401,402Recommendations for V VS (Continued)
COR LOE Recommendations
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on November 12, 2025

Shen et al
August 1, 2017 Circulation. 2017;136:e60–e122. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000499
 e865.3. Carotid Sinus Syndrome: 
Recommendations
Carotid sinus syndrome is associated with mechanical 
manipulation of the carotid sinus, either spontaneously 
or with carotid sinus massage. It is diagnosed by the 
reproduction of clinical syncope during carotid sinus massage, with a cardioinhibitory response if asystole 
is >3 seconds or if there is AV block, or a significant 
vasodepressor response if there is ≥50 mm Hg drop in 
systolic blood pressure, or a mixed cardioinhibitory and vasodepressor response. It occurs more commonly in men >40 years of age
413,414 and is due to an abnormal 
reflex attributed to baroreceptor and possibly medul-
la dysfunction.415,416 Carotid sinus massage should be 
performed sequentially over the right and left carotid 
artery sinus in both the supine and upright positions for 5 seconds each, with continuous beat-to-beat heart 
rate monitoring and blood pressure measurement.
417 
Contraindications to performing carotid sinus massage 
include auscultation of carotid bruit and transient isch-
emic attack, stroke, or myocardial infarction within the 
prior 3 months, except if carotid Doppler excludes sig-nificant stenosis.
418
Recommendations for Carotid Sinus Syndrome
COR LOE Recommendations
IIa B-RPermanent cardiac pacing is reasonable in patients with carotid sinus syndrome that is cardioinhibitory or 
mixed.413,419–426
See Online Data Supplements 29–32.Syncope recurred in fewer patients treated with pacing than in untreated patients, with observation periods up to 5 years.
420,423 In 3 
controlled, open-label trials, the relative risk reduction of syncope recurrence with pacemaker implantation was 76%.409,427–429 There 
are no large RCTs.
IIb B-RIt may be reasonable to implant a dual-chamber pacemaker in patients with carotid sinus syndrome who require permanent pacing.
427–430
See Online Data Supplements 29–32.Evidence for dual-chamber pacing versus single-chamber pacing in carotid sinus hypersensitivity is limited to a few small RCTs and limited 
observational data.
409,418,427–429 Although mixed, the data suggest dual-chamber pacing may prevent hemodynamic compromise and improve 
symptom recurrence in older adults who may have concomitant sinus node dysfunction or conduction system disease.
5.4. Other Reflex Conditions
Situational syncope is defined as syncope occurring 
only in certain distinct and usually memorable circum-stances, including micturition syncope, defecation 
syncope, cough syncope, laugh syncope, and swallow 
syncope.
431–437 Appropriate investigations should be un-
dertaken to determine an underlying etiology, includ-ing causes that may be reversible.
431,433–436 Evidence for 
treatment is limited mainly to case reports, small case series, and small observational studies.
431,433–436 Treat-
ment of most types of situational syncope relies heavily on avoidance or elimination of a triggering event. This may not always be possible, so increased fluid and salt 
consumption and reduction or removal of hypotensive 
drugs and diuretics are encouraged where appropriate 
and safe.436
6. ORTHOSTATIC HYPOTENSION: 
RECOMMENDATIONS
6.1. Neurogenic Orthostatic Hypotension: 
Recommendations
OH involves excessive pooling of blood volume in the 
splanchnic and leg circulations. With standing, venous 
Figure 4. Vasovagal Syncope.  
Colors correspond to Class of Recom-mendation in Table 1. V VS indicates 
vasovagal syncope.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on November 12, 2025

2017 ACC/AHA/HRS Syncope Guideline
Circulation. 2017;136:e60–e122. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000499 August 1, 2017
 e87
CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINESRecommendations for Neurogenic OH
COR LOE Recommendations
I B-RAcute water ingestion is recommended in patients with syncope caused by neurogenic OH for occasional, temporary 
relief.438,439
See Online Data 
Supplements 33–35.In neurogenic OH, acute water ingestion can temporarily restore orthostatic tolerance.438–444 The pressor effect of water is most likely 
sympathetically driven, with the peak effect occurring 30 minutes after ingestion of ≥ 240 mL and additional benefit seen with ≥ 480 
mL.398,441,442 The presence of glucose or salt may reduce this effect by splanchnic vasodilatation or a decreased osmopressor response, 
respectively.397,439 Acute water ingestion for temporary relief of OH is not intended for routine or long-term use.24
IIa C-LD Physical counter-pressure maneuvers can be beneficial in patients with neurogenic OH with syncope.374,445–450
See Online Data Supplements 33–35.Isometric contraction, such as by leg crossing, lower body muscle tensing, and maximal force handgrip, can increase blood pressure, with the largest effect occurring with squatting versus other counter-pressure maneuvers.
374,445–450 Leg crossing increases cardiac 
output in patients with neurogenic hypotension.447 Similar or larger benefit would be expected with squatting and other isometric 
contraction.449 The benefit is limited to patients with sufficient prodrome and the ability to perform these maneuvers adequately 
and safely.449
IIa C-LD Compression garments can be beneficial in patients with syncope and OH.451–455
See Online Data Supplements 33–35.In patients with OH, including older adult patients and those with neurogenic etiologies, compression garments can improve 
orthostatic symptoms and blunt associated decreases in blood pressure.
451–456 The garments should be at least thigh high and 
preferably include the abdomen, as shorter garments have not been proved to be beneficial.457
IIa B-R Midodrine can be beneficial in patients with syncope due to neurogenic OH.458–467
See Online Data 
Supplements 33–35.Midodrine improves symptoms of OH in patients with neurogenic OH.458–467 There is a dose-dependent effect, usually corresponding 
to an increase in standing blood pressure.459,460,462,463,466,467 Its use may be limited by supine hypertension, and other common side 
effects include scalp tingling, piloerection, and urinary retention.459,460,463,467
IIa B-R Droxidopa can be beneficial in patients with syncope due to neurogenic OH.380,468–471
See Online Data Supplements 33–35.Droxidopa improves symptoms of neurogenic OH due to Parkinson disease, pure autonomic failure, and multiple system atrophy.
380,468,470,471 Droxidopa might reduce falls, according to small studies.472 Use of carbidopa in patients with Parkinson disease 
may decrease the effectiveness of droxidopa.380 Use and titration of droxidopa may be limited by supine hypertension,380,469 
headache, dizziness, and nausea.468,470–472
IIa C-LD Fludrocortisone can be beneficial in patients with syncope due to neurogenic OH.473–476
See Online Data Supplements 33–35.Fludrocortisone increases plasma volume, with a resultant improvement in symptoms of OH.
473,477,478 When taken regularly, 
fludrocortisone may prevent OH, at least in astronauts after space flight.476 Supine hypertension may be a limiting factor. When 
supine hypertension is present, other medications should be used before fludrocortisone. Other side effects commonly seen include 
edema, hypokalemia, and headache, but more serious adverse reactions, such as adrenal suppression and immunosuppression, can 
also occur with doses >0.3 mg daily.479,480
IIb C-LD Encouraging increased salt and fluid intake may be reasonable in selected patients with neurogenic OH.396,398,441,443,444
See Online Data Supplements 33–35.Although the data are limited for salt and fluid supplementation in patients with OH, these 2 treatments may improve blood pressure while 
decreasing symptoms from OH.
396,398,439–444 Salt supplementation (eg, 6 to 9 g [100 to 150 mmol; about 1 to 2 teaspoons] of salt per day) 
increases plasma volume, with limited benefit in patients with already high salt intake.396 Water ingestion increases the blood pressure via a 
pressor effect, most likely mediated by sympathetic activation, with a peak effect approximately 30 minutes after ingestion.398,439,441–443 This 
additional salt and fluid intake may not be beneficial in patients with history of hypertension, renal disease, HF, or cardiac dysfunction, and the long-term effects of these treatments, including the benefits and risks, is unknown.
IIb C-LDPyridostigmine may be beneficial in patients with syncope due to neurogenic OH who are refractory to other 
treatments.
466,481,482
See Online Data Supplements 33–35.In patients with autonomic failure and neurogenic OH, pyridostigmine is able to improve orthostatic tolerance through increases 
in peripheral vascular resistance and blood pressure.
481,482 Side effects include nausea, vomiting, abdominal cramping, sweating, 
salivation, and urinary incontinence.483
IIb C-LD Octreotide may be beneficial in patients with syncope and refractory recurrent postprandial or neurogenic OH.484–487
See Online Data 
Supplements 33–35.Splanchnic circulation pooling can contribute to OH, and this pooling can worsen in the postprandial period.484–487 Octreotide 
reduces splanchnic blood flow by approximately 20%,486 which prevents postprandial hypotension, increases blood pressure, and 
improves orthostatic tolerance.484–487return to the heart drops, with a resultant decrease in 
cardiac output.31 Normally, the autonomic nervous sys-
tem provides compensatory changes in vascular tone, heart rate, and cardiac contractility. In some individu-als, this response may be defective or inadequate.
31 In 
neurogenic OH, the vasoconstrictor mechanisms of vas-cular tone may be inadequate because of neurodegen-erative disorders, such as multiple system atrophy, pure autonomic failure, Parkinson’s disease, and autonomic peripheral neuropathies, such as those due to diabetes mellitus and other systemic diseases.
31 Neurogenic OH 
may present clinically as classic or delayed OH. Most commonly, OH is due to dehydration or medications, such as diuretics and vasodilators. Syncope caused by OH conditions occurs in the upright position. See Fig-ure 5 for the algorithm for treatment of OH.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on November 12, 2025

Shen et al
August 1, 2017 Circulation. 2017;136:e60–e122. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000499
 e886.2. Dehydration and Drugs: 
Recommendations
Syncope related to medication becomes prevalent par -
ticularly in older adults, who frequently have multiple 
comorbidities requiring treatment and are prone to poly-
pharmacy effects.488–490 Cessation of offending medica-
tions is usually key for symptomatic improvement, but 
often feasibility of cessation of medications is limited by the necessity of the treatments.491–493 Dehydration may 
manifest along a spectrum of symptoms, ranging from 
tachycardia to shock, depending on whether a person 
has compensated or uncompensated hypovolemia.494 
Orthostatic tolerance worsens with dehydration and is 
exacerbated by heat stress, which promotes vasodila-
tion.495–497 Rehydration, whether by intravenous or oral 
formulation, should include sodium supplementation 
for more rapid recovery.21,498–501
Recommendations for Dehydration and Drugs
COR LOE Recommendations
I C-LDFluid resuscitation via oral or intravenous bolus is recommended in patients with syncope due to acute 
dehydration.438,499,501–504
See Online Data Supplements 36 and 
37.Fluid resuscitation is recommended for syncope secondary to both dehydration and exercise-associated hypotension. The latter 
is likely due to peripheral vasodilation and vasovagal physiology.
438,495,504,505 Both dehydration and heat stress worsen orthostatic 
tolerance.495–497 Oral fluid bolus may require less volume than intravenous fluid infusion to have a similar treatment effect because 
oral fluid loading has a pressor effect.398,438,440–444,502 Beverages with increased sodium concentration (closer to normal body 
osmolality) rehydrate faster than beverages with lower sodium concentration or increased osmolality (eg, because of glucose 
content).498–501,503,506
IIa B-NRReducing or withdrawing medications that may cause hypotension can be beneficial in selected patients with syncope.
488–490,492,507–510
See Online Data 
Supplements 36 and 
37.Syncope is a commonly reported adverse drug reaction, often resulting in hospital admission.488,489 The prevalence of 
medication-related syncope appears higher in older patients.491,492,507,510 Several drug classes have been implicated in syncope, 
including diuretics, vasodilators, venodilators, negative chronotropes, and sedatives.488–490,492,507–510 Close supervision during 
adjustment of medications is frequently required because of potential worsening of preexisting supine hypertension or cardiac arrhythmias.
491–493,511 Other factors to consider include frailty, HF and/or cardiac dysfunction, and the use of a large number of 
medications causing adverse effects because of drug-drug interactions.488,507,511–513
IIa C-LDIn selected patients with syncope due to dehydration, it is reasonable to encourage increased salt and fluid intake.
396,498–501,503
See Online Data 
Supplements 36 and 
37.In patients with dehydration, sodium supplementation improves plasma volume and improves orthostatic tolerance.396,499,503 This 
additional dietary sodium may be provided as sodium tablets or sodium already dissolved in beverages.396,498–500,503 Higher-sodium-
content beverages with osmolality comparable to normal body osmolality may rehydrate faster than lower-sodium-content beverages.
498–501,503 This treatment option is not appropriate for patients with cardiac dysfunction or HF, uncontrolled hypertension, 
or chronic kidney disease.19
7. ORTHOSTATIC INTOLERANCE
Orthostatic intolerance is a general term referring to fre-
quent, recurrent, or persistent symptoms that develop upon standing (usually with a change in position from sit-ting or lying to an upright position) and are relieved by sitting or lying.
38 Most commonly, the symptoms include 
lightheadedness, palpitations, tremulousness, generalized weakness, blurred vision, exercise intolerance, and fa-tigue. These symptoms may be accompanied by hemo-dynamic disturbances, including blood pressure decrease, which may or may not meet criteria for OH, and heart rate increase, which may be inadequate or compensato-
ry.
38 The pathophysiology is quite varied. One condition of 
note is POTS, in which upright posture results in an appar -
ently inappropriate tachycardia, usually with heart rates 
>120 bpm.24
Although syncope occurs in patients with POTS, it is 
relatively infrequent, and there is little evidence that the syncope is due to POTS.
24,514 Treatments that improve 
symptoms of POTS might decrease the occurrence of syncope, although this is unknown.
24,514–523 For further guidance on the management of POTS, we refer read-
ers to the HRS consensus statement.24
8. PSEUDOSYNCOPE: 
RECOMMENDATIONS
Psychogenic pseudosyncope is a syndrome of appar -
ent loss of consciousness occurring in the absence of 
impaired cerebral perfusion or function. Psychogenic 
pseudosyncope is believed to be a conversion disor -
der—in essence, an external somatic manifestation or response to internal psychological stresses. It is an in-
voluntary response and should not be confused with 
malingering or Munchausen syndrome. Psychogenic 
pseudosyncope and pseudoseizures may be the same 
condition. The clinical distinction between the two 
is based on whether prominent jerky muscle move-
ments simulating seizure activity are reported by wit-
nesses. In the absence of associated jerky movements, 
the patient is likely to be referred for evaluation of syncope.
30,229,524 Psychogenic pseudosyncope does not 
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on November 12, 2025

2017 ACC/AHA/HRS Syncope Guideline
Circulation. 2017;136:e60–e122. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000499 August 1, 2017
 e89
CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINESresult in a true loss of consciousness, but it is included 
in the present document because patients appear to exhibit syncope and therefore are referred for evalua-tion of syncope.
Several key clinical features are suggestive of the di-
agnosis of psychogenic pseudosyncope. None alone, however, provides a definitive diagnosis. Patients with psychogenic pseudosyncope are often young females with a higher prevalence of preexisting V VS or a his-
tory of physical and/or sexual abuse.
229,525 The appar -ent duration of loss of consciousness is often long (5 to 20 minutes), and episodes are frequent.
525 Some com-
mon characteristics include closed eyes, lack of pallor and diaphoresis, and usually little physical harm.
526 A 
normal pulse, blood pressure, or EEG during a psycho-genic pseudosyncope episode can be documented.
229 
Although many patients with pseudosyncope can be diagnosed with a careful history, occasionally tilt-table testing with or without transcranial Doppler and moni-toring of an EEG is helpful.
Recommendations for the Treatment of Pseudosyncope
COR LOE Recommendations
IIb C-LDIn patients with suspected pseudosyncope, a candid discussion with the patient about the diagnosis may be 
reasonable.30,527–529
See Online Data Supplements 38 and 
39.Some reports suggest that patients benefit from being informed of the suspected diagnosis in a clear but sympathetic manner that 
also acknowledges the involuntary nature of the attacks.
30,527,528
IIb C-LD Cognitive behavioral therapy may be beneficial in patients with pseudosyncope.530–532
See Online Data Supplements 38 and 
39.Uncontrolled studies suggest that psychotherapy, particularly cognitive behavioral therapy, may be beneficial in conversion 
disorders.
530–532 One RCT reported that cognitive behavioral therapy provided a non–statistically significant trend toward 
improvement in pseudosyncope at 3 months.530 There are no data that support significant benefit from pharmacotherapy.529
9. UNCOMMON CONDITIONS 
ASSOCIATED WITH SYNCOPE
Syncope has been reported in many uncommon dis-
eases, according to case reports. However, specific conditions may predispose the patient to various types of syncope. Table 9 provides a list of less common con-ditions associated with syncope. It is not intended as a reference for differential diagnosis or a complete syn-opsis of all conditions associated with syncope. Fur -
thermore, it is not necessary to fully evaluate for all these causes when the etiology remains elusive. Most of these presentations rarely cause syncope, and data are sparse. If the cause for syncope is unclear, these conditions could be included in the differential diag-nosis on the basis of other clinical characteristics and/or historical features.
10. AGE, LIFESTYLE, AND SPECIAL 
POPULATIONS: RECOMMENDATIONS
10.1. Pediatric Syncope: 
Recommendations
Syncope is common in the pediatric population. By 18 
years of age, it is estimated that 30% to 50% of chil-dren experience at least 1 fainting episode, and syn-cope accounts for 3% of all pediatric ED visits.
617–622 The 
incidence is higher in females and peaks between 15 to 19 years of age.
617 Neurally mediated syncope accounts for 75% of pediatric syncope, followed by psychogen-
ic or unexplained syncope in 8% to 15% of cases.623 
Breath-holding spells are a form of syncope unique to the pediatric population. Cyanotic breath-holding spells typically occur from age 6 months to age 5 years and 
may be due to desaturation caused by forced expiration 
during crying. Pallid breath-holding spells are seen in the first 1 to 2 years of age and may be an early form of V VS. The latter episodes are associated with signifi-
cant bradycardia and prolonged asystole. Pediatric car -
diac syncope may result from obstruction to blood flow (HCM, aortic stenosis, pulmonary hypertension), myo-
cardial dysfunction (myocarditis, cardiomyopathy, con-
genital coronary anomaly, or post–Kawasaki disease) or a primary arrhythmic etiology (LQTS, CPVT, Brugada syndrome, ARVC, or Wolff-Parkinson-White syndrome).
A detailed history with careful attention to the events 
leading up to the syncope and a complete physical ex-amination can guide practitioners in differentiating the life-threatening causes of syncope (with potential for injury or SCD) from the more common and benign neu-rally mediated syncope. A detailed family history, with particular attention to premature SCD among first- and second-degree relatives and the manner in which those deaths occurred, is helpful. Given that many of the 
causes of non-CHD cardiac syncope in children who do 
not have a form of CHD are similar to those experienced in an adult cohort (LQTS, HCM, Wolff-Parkinson-White, Brugada, and ARVC), interventions recommended for adults with similar conditions presenting with syncope can be applied in children.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on November 12, 2025

Shen et al
August 1, 2017 Circulation. 2017;136:e60–e122. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000499 e90
Recommendations for Pediatric Syncope
COR LOE Recommendations
I C-LDV VS evaluation, including a detailed medical history, physical examination, family history, and a 12-lead ECG, should be 
performed in all pediatric patients presenting with syncope.315,618,620,624–630
See Online Data 
Supplement 40.Although V VS is the most common cause of pediatric syncope, cardiac syncope does represent 1.5% to 6% of pediatric cases 
(usually defined as up to 18 years of age).617,619,620,629,631,632 Characteristics of presenting signs and symptoms differentiating 
V VS from cardiac causes of syncope are generally similar to those in adults. A family history of V VS and early SCD should be 
sought. V VS occurs in 33% to 80% of children with syncope.624,628 Risk factors that raise suspicion of a cardiac etiology include 
the absence of prodromal symptoms, presence of preceding palpitations within seconds of loss of consciousness, lack of a 
prolonged upright posture, syncope during exercise or in response to auditory or emotional triggers, family history of SCD, 
abnormal physical examination, and abnormal ECG,626,627 although the specificity is modest.618,627,630,633 It should be remembered 
that children may not be able to clearly communicate specific symptoms. Exertional syncope has been associated with LQTS 
and CPVT.315,318,337,630,634 Regardless of symptoms, exertional syncope, especially mid-exertional syncope, should result in a high 
index of suspicion for a cardiac etiology.633
I C-LDNoninvasive diagnostic testing should be performed in pediatric patients presenting with syncope and suspected CHD, cardiomyopathy, or primary rhythm disorder.
315,318,618,625,627,630,633
See Online Data 
Supplement 40.Channelopathies are major causes of cardiac-related syncope in young people. They may be associated with a family history of SCD, and they increase the risk of SCD in these patients.
315,337,630,632,634,635 Exercise stress testing may be helpful in the 
diagnosis of channelopathies, such as LQTS and CPVT, which have adrenergically mediated arrhythmias. Extended monitoring 
is reasonable when an arrhythmia diagnosis is suspected. The types of monitoring devices, their clinical utility, and their 
limitations are available in Table 8. Prolonged heart rhythm monitoring can often provide a correlation between symptoms 
and an arrhythmia. In 5 retrospective studies of prolonged monitoring in 87 children with either syncope or presyncope, the 
mean diagnostic yield was 43%.636–640 Bradyarrhythmias and high-grade AV block or asystole, as well as tachyarrhythmias, 
SVT, and polymorphic VT, were documented.636–640 The diagnostic yield of an ICM is higher if the clinical indication was 
exertional syncope or the patient had underlying CHD.637,639,640
I C-EO Education on symptom awareness of prodromes and reassurance are indicated in pediatric patients with V VS.
See Online Data Supplement 40.Management of children with V VS should include reassurance about the generally benign nature of this condition.
641,642 
Treatment should emphasize symptom awareness and avoidance of precipitating factors that might worsen the condition, 
such as dehydration, standing for prolonged periods of time, hot crowded environments, and diuretic intake.
IIa C-LD Tilt-table testing can be useful for pediatric patients with suspected V  VS when the diagnosis is unclear.624,629,643–650
See Online Data 
Supplement 40.Tilt-table testing has a diminishing role in the diagnosis of children with unexplained syncope. The sensitivity of tilt-table testing 
ranges from 20% to 90%,624,629,643,644,647,648,651,652 and the specificity ranges from 83% to 100%.624,643,652 Pediatric patients with 
episodes of V VS may exhibit convulsive movements during loss of consciousness that mimic epileptic seizures. In children with 
syncope and convulsions on tilt-table testing, 64% exhibited cardiac asystole with pauses >3 seconds.645 Upright tilt-table testing 
combined with a graded isoproterenol infusion identified 42% to 67% of patients previously thought to have a primary seizure disorder.
223,649 A combined cardiology and neurology evaluation may be warranted in this group of patients with syncope and 
seizure-like activity.
IIa B-R In pediatric patients with V VS not responding to lifestyle measures, it is reasonable to prescribe midodrine.381,620,653
See Online Data 
Supplement 40.In a single-center prospective case series, pseudoephedrine reduced clinical symptoms in 94% of children with recurrent neurally mediated syncope.
653 In an RCT comparing patients receiving conventional therapy (health education, tilt-table 
training, and salt) and midodrine with patients receiving conventional therapy alone, the recurrence rate of syncope 
decreased from 80% to 22%.381 In 2 prospective studies, side effects from midodrine were rare.381,653
IIb B-R Encouraging increased salt and fluid intake may be reasonable in selected pediatric patients with V VS.642
See Online Data 
Supplement 40.In an RCT, conventional therapy and oral rehydration salts resulted in no further recurrence of syncope in 56% of patients, versus 39% in the placebo arm (P<0.05).
642
IIb C-LD The effectiveness of fludrocortisone is uncertain in pediatric patients with OH associated with syncope.389,654,655
See Online Data Supplement 40.In 2 single-center prospective case series of 0.1 mg of fludrocortisone, 83% of subjects demonstrated improvement or resolution of symptoms.
654,655 In the only pediatric RCT, children with recurrent syncope did better on placebo than on fludrocortisone.389
IIb B-NRCardiac pacing may be considered in pediatric patients with severe neurally mediated syncope secondary to pallid 
breath-holding spells.656,657
See Online Data 
Supplement 40.In 2 separate studies of 22 predominantly infants and toddlers with reflex anoxic seizures, pallid breath-holding spells, and 
documented prolonged asystole (pauses >4 seconds), 86% had either complete resolution or a significant reduction in the number 
of syncopal events with pacing.656,657 Although the studies were not powered to address the specifics of pacing programming, 
either single- or dual-chamber pacing significantly reduced the number of syncopal episodes compared with a sensing-only 
strategy.656,657 Single-chamber pacing with hysteresis appears as effective as dual-chamber pacing with rate drop response for 
the prevention of syncope and seizures. The beneficial response to pacing in these studies cannot exclude a placebo effect from pacemaker implantation itself; however, the young age of the patients with pallid breath-holding spells makes placebo effect less 
likely. The long-term outcome with pacing in this population has not been reported. Finally, it is important to remember that pallid 
breath-holding syncope does end, although some patients do present again at a later age with classic V VS. This should be balanced 
against the known complications of permanent cardiac pacing.
III: No 
BenefitB-RBeta blockers are not beneficial in pediatric patients with V VS.
655,658
See Online Data 
Supplement 40.In an RCT comparing metoprolol and conventional therapy, the treatment group actually had a higher recurrence rate. Side effects of beta blockers occur frequently in children.
655,659
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on November 12, 2025

2017 ACC/AHA/HRS Syncope Guideline
Circulation. 2017;136:e60–e122. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000499 August 1, 2017
 e91
CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINES
Figure 5. Orthostatic Hypotension.  
Colors correspond to Class of Recommendation in Table 1. BP indicates blood pressure; and OH, orthostatic hypotension.10.2. Adult Congenital Heart Disease: Recommendations
Recommendations for ACHD
COR LOE Recommendations
IIa C-EO For evaluation of patients with ACHD and syncope, referral to a specialist with expertise in ACHD can be beneficial.
N/AThe care of the expanding population of ACHD survivors is complex, especially in patients with moderate-to-severe ACHD. Care 
providers must be knowledgeable in the anatomy and repair; be vigilant in the recognition and management of HF, arrhythmias, and 
pulmonary hypertension; and have a deep understanding of noncardiac comorbidities. Delivery of ACHD care in highly specialized 
centers has been shown to reduce mortality rate.663 In a population-based retrospective study of 71 467 patients with ACHD from 
Quebec, Canada, between 1990 and 2005, care in a specialized referral center for ACHD care, compared with other care, was independently associated with reduced mortality rate, particularly in those with severe ACHD.
663
IIa B-NR EPS is reasonable in patients with moderate or severe ACHD and unexplained syncope.664,665
See Online Data 
Supplement 40.SCD is a leading cause of death in the patient with ACHD. Unexplained syncope is a concerning event. In a cohort of 252 patients with repaired tetralogy of Fallot undergoing risk stratification with programmed ventricular stimulation, induction of 
either monomorphic or polymorphic VT predicted future clinical VT and SCD.
664 Patients with tetralogy of Fallot and inducible 
monomorphic or polymorphic VT were more likely to have a history of syncope (42.9%) than were those without inducible VT (13.4%).
664 In a cohort study of ICD recipients with transposition of the great arteries after an atrial baffle procedure, 35% 
of patients with primary-prevention ICDs presented with syncope. In 50% of patients receiving appropriate ICD shocks, atrial tachyarrhythmias preceded or coexisted with VT.
665 It is reasonable to exclude atrial arrhythmias in patients with syncope and a CHD 
substrate at risk of atrial arrhythmias (eg, Mustard, Senning, Fontan, Ebstein anomaly, and tetralogy of Fallot).665
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on November 12, 2025

Shen et al
August 1, 2017 Circulation. 2017;136:e60–e122. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000499
 e92Patients with ACHD are at risk for syncope as a result 
not only of the underlying structural disease, but also 
as a result of a previous palliative or corrective surgery. 
These patients may present with syncope of both he-modynamic and either bradycardic or tachycardic ori-
gin. Care by a physician with experience in manage-
ment of CHD can be beneficial. The entire spectrum of arrhythmias may be seen in adults with CHD, including 
bradyarrhythmias secondary to sinus or AV nodal dis-
ease, atrial arrhythmias, and VA. By age 50 years, ap-proximately 38% of patients with ACHD will develop 
an atrial arrhythmia, and by age 65 years, >50% of 
patients with severe CHD will develop atrial arrhyth-mias.
660 The prevalence of VT after tetralogy of Fallot 
repair is 3% to 14%.661,662
10.3. Geriatric Patients: 
Recommendations
The management of syncope in older adults is par -
ticularly challenging: The incidence is high; the dif-
ferential diagnosis is broad; the diagnosis is imprecise 
because of amnesia, falls, lack of witnesses, and poly-pharmacy; and secondary morbidity is high because of 
comorbidities, physical injury, and frailty.
35,45,666–675 The 
vulnerability of older adults to syncope increases be-cause of age-associated cardiovascular and autonomic changes, decreased fluid conservation,
45,671,676–678 and 
an increased probability of developing multiple con-
current morbidities (with their associated pharmaco-logical treatments) that can overwhelm homeostasis. In many instances, a syncopal event in an older adult is multifactorial, with many predisposing factors present 
simultaneously.
Older patients (>75 years of age) who present with 
syncope tend to have poor outcomes, both fatal and 
nonfatal.
109,679,680 Although some of the risk is attrib-
utable to the aspects of syncope described in this guideline, among older adults such risks are usually compounded by multiple morbidities and frailty, which add to age-related vulnerability to syncope,
671,681,682 
and by the physical injuries associated with falls, col-lisions, or trauma, which more commonly result from syncope in old age.
670 Furthermore, recurrent syncope 
can lead to nursing home admission and a devastating loss of independence.
683 Given the multifactorial etiolo-
gies and high risks associated with syncope, a compre-hensive and multidisciplinary approach is often neces-sary to assess for multiple morbidities, frailty, trauma, and other dimensions of health (including cognition and medications) pertinent to diagnosis and manage-ment.
77,188,684,685 A thorough history and physical exami-
nation, including orthostatic vital signs, is particularly important in older patients.
77
Recommendations for Geriatric Patients
COR LOE Recommendations
IIa C-EOFor the assessment and management of older adults with syncope, a comprehensive approach in collaboration with an 
expert in geriatric care can be beneficial.
N/AA multidisciplinary approach helps to facilitate diagnosis of frailty and other factors that predispose to syncope and poor outcome 
in older adults. The goal is to make management decisions in which older patients are well informed, therapeutic choices are 
tailored to each patient’s needs and goals of care, and decision making is successfully shared between patients and providers. 
Diagnostic and therapeutic approaches to syncope should incorporate considerations of age, comorbid illness, physical and 
cognitive functions, patient preferences, and severity of symptoms. Assessment is required of underlying cardiovascular and 
noncardiovascular diseases; use of medications (eg, polypharmacy, drug-drug interaction, age-related reduction in hepatic and renal clearance); the potential to reduce medications that might lower blood pressure; and circumstantial factors, such as dehydration, 
infection, or fever.
Consideration of frailty is particularly relevant. Characteristics of frailty include weight loss, weakness, exhaustion, reduced 
physical activity, physical slowing, and cognitive decline, with cumulative severity and impact that typically vary between patients 
and even in 1 patient over time.
IIa B-NR It is reasonable to consider syncope as a cause of nonaccidental falls in older adults.
666–669,686
See Online Data Supplement 41.Approximately 30% of older adults who present with nonaccidental falls may have had syncope.
687 Amnesia is commonly 
associated with both falls and loss of consciousness, which diminishes the effectiveness of the history. Cognitive impairment is also 
frequently present in older adults, even in those without a formal diagnosis of dementia,688–690 and this too can reduce the accuracy 
of recall of the clinical event.666–669,673,686
10.4. Driving and Syncope: 
Recommendation
The assessment of medical fitness to drive is a common 
issue for practitioners caring for patients with syncope. The main concern is the risk of causing injury or death 
to the driver or others as a result of recurrent synco-
pe.
691 Factors to consider in assessing the risk of syn-cope while driving are summarized in a formula devel-
oped by the Canadian Cardiovascular Society 25 years ago
692 that estimates the risk that a driver will suddenly 
become incapacitated. The acceptable level of risk then becomes a societal decision.
Balancing the need to minimize risk from drivers 
fainting is the need for patients to drive to meet the demands of family and work. Society recognizes that 
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on November 12, 2025

2017 ACC/AHA/HRS Syncope Guideline
Circulation. 2017;136:e60–e122. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000499 August 1, 2017
 e93
CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINESRecommendation for Driving and Syncope
COR LOE Recommendation
IIa C-EOIt can be beneficial for healthcare providers managing patients with syncope to know the driving laws and restrictions 
in their regions and discuss implications with the patient.
N/AThe writing committee encourages healthcare providers who care for patients with syncope to know pertinent driving laws and 
restrictions in their region (eg, states or provinces), as well as the duty of drivers or physicians to report inability of an individual to 
drive a motor vehicle. The Risk of Harm formula simply estimates risk and does not supersede local driving regulations.692 In the 
United States, private driving is state regulated, but commercial driving requiring a US Department of Transportation commercial driver’s license is federally regulated. Recommendations about commercial driving are more a legal than a medical matter, and are 
not within the purview of this guideline. Physicians providing care to commercial drivers should be familiar with US Department of 
Transportation policy.
695
Individual states may require reporting of drivers who faint. Many patients do not stop driving despite advice to do so, regardless 
of the duration of restriction.696,697 Although physicians have an obligation to maintain confidentiality, if a patient’s condition poses 
a significant risk to others, then this information should be reported as specific laws require.certain groups, such as younger and older adults, are 
allowed to drive despite their higher risk of causing harm for reasons other than syncope.
693 The societally 
acceptable risk of injury and death due to motor ve-hicle accidents has been quantified from an analysis of accident data collected in the United States, United Kingdom, and Canada.
694 In the general population, 
the yearly risk of serious injury and death is 0.067%, or 1 in 1500.
694 The 418 patients in POST I and POST 
II had a median of 3 vasovagal faints in 1 year but had no serious injuries or deaths and only 2 minor ac-cidents in the subsequent year.
694 This provides an es-
timated yearly risk of serious injury and death in the V VS population of <0.0017%, less than the Risk of 
Harm formula predicted.
692 However, for patients with 
other etiologies of syncope or those in whom syncope occurred without prodrome or warning, the risk of causing harm may be higher than for patients with V VS. Public policies, laws, and regulations have not 
been adapted to these results, and providers caring for patients with syncope should be aware of pertinent local driving laws and restrictions. Although untreated syncope may disqualify patients from driving, effective treatment reduces the risk enough to permit driving after a period of observation has elapsed without re-current syncope. Regulatory agencies are more likely to disqualify commercial drivers than private drivers because of the amount of driving and the impact of accidents (ie, commercial drivers typically operate ve-hicles heavier than private automobiles). As the risk of recurrent syncope decreases with treatment or with the natural history of a disease process, the risk of harm may become low enough for private drivers to resuming driving, but not necessarily for commercial drivers because of the higher risk of harm. The sugges-tions in Table 10 provide general guidance for private drivers. Most suggestions are based on expert opinion and supported by limited data. Commercial driving in the United States is governed by federal law and ad-ministered by the US Department of Transportation.
695
10.5. Athletes: Recommendations
Syncope occurring in the athlete is predominantly of 
vasovagal origin, but underlying cardiac conditions may place athletes at undue risk for adverse events.
703 Syn-
cope during exercise is associated with increased prob-ability of cardiac causes of syncope (Table 4). A thor -
ough history, differentiating syncope occurring during 
exercise from syncope occurring after exercise or at 
other times, with typical characteristics of dehydration or V VS, is critically important during initial evaluation. 
The definition of an athlete is imprecise, but athlete can be defined as someone who engages in routine vigorous training (eg, >150 minutes per week) and is skilled in exercises, sports, or games requiring physical strength, agility, or stamina.
704 More importantly, car -
diac adaptations to high levels of exercise may lead to the “athlete’s heart” and thus alter the myocardial sub-strate.
705 Primary or secondary prevention of syncope, 
morbidity, and mortality in at-risk athletes is a major 
consideration, but current strategies are largely inad-
equate.706 The current evidence base is insufficient to 
support general screening with ECG or echocardiogra-
phy at baseline.706,707
Several approved therapeutics, especially macro-
lide antibiotics and antihistamines/decongestants, have been associated with syncopal episodes.
708 Per-
formance-enhancing agents, such as somatotrophic compounds and amphetamine-like stimulants, are as-
sociated with precipitous collapse. A careful history is 
required in the athlete with syncope to rule out expo-
sure to any of these agents.
709 Similarly, before drugs 
are prescribed to highly competitive athletes, it is pru-
dent to determine whether the drug or its metabolites 
are on lists of banned substances.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on November 12, 2025

Shen et al
August 1, 2017 Circulation. 2017;136:e60–e122. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000499 e94
Recommendations for Athletes
COR LOE Recommendations
I C-EOCardiovascular assessment by a care provider experienced in treating athletes with syncope is recommended prior to 
resuming competitive sports.
N/AA thorough history and physical examination should be completed by an experienced provider, including an assessment for OH and evidence of underlying cardiovascular disease.
709–711 Cardiovascular causes account for 75% of sport-related deaths in young athletes.709,710 
Syncope that occurs after exercise is often of benign origin and may be due to abdominal venous pooling. However, syncope during 
exercise is a much more compelling symptom and can be a harbinger of SCD.712,713 Syncopal episodes first require a personal and family 
history to evaluate precipitating causes and benign conditions, particularly volume depletion and vasovagal activity. Concomitant illnesses, especially viral infections, should be investigated and an ECG obtained.
709,710
IIa C-LDAssessment by a specialist with disease-specific expertise is reasonable for athletes with syncope and high-risk markers.
706,714
N/ASyncope in the competitive athlete requires an evaluation for potentially fatal causes of syncope, especially when evidence of HCM, LQTS, 
Wolff-Parkinson-White syndrome, ARVC, ventricular noncompaction, symptomatic mitral valve prolapse, Marfan syndrome, congenital 
coronary anomalies, or other at-risk conditions is present.706,709,715,716 Any suspected cardiovascular pathology requires further evaluation, 
and family counseling and/or genetic testing is advised for those conditions with a known familial tendency.
IIa C-LDExtended monitoring can be beneficial for athletes with unexplained exertional syncope after an initial cardiovascular evaluation.
717,718
N/AFor those with a suspected cardiovascular etiology of syncope, an evaluation includes an ECG, tilt-table testing, and imaging 
as clinically indicated (Figure 3).719 Imaging may include echocardiography or MRI as required. Exercise stress testing, unless 
contraindicated, can be helpful. For persistent unexplained syncope, extended arrhythmia monitoring can be used, as 
appropriate. This is a rapidly evolving field, with no firm data on the best device and optimum monitoring period.720
III: Harm B-NRParticipation in competitive sports is not recommended for athletes with syncope and phenotype-positive HCM, CPVT, LQTS1, or ARVC before evaluation by a specialist.
704,721–724
See Online Data 
Supplement 42.In the absence of vagal mechanisms, VA in patients with HCM, CPVT, LQTS1, or ARVC is catecholamine sensitive. Participation in competitive sports in that circumstance in these patients is not recommended.
704,715,716
11. QUALITY OF LIFE AND 
HEALTHCARE COST OF SYNCOPE
11.1. Impact of Syncope on Quality  
of Life
QoL is reduced with recurrent syncope,725–733 as dem-
onstrated in studies that compared patients with and 
without syncope.727,731 QoL associated with recurrent 
syncope was equivalent to severe rheumatoid arthritis and chronic low-back pain in an adult population.
728 
Similarly, pediatric patients with recurrent syncope re-ported worse QoL than individuals with diabetes mel-
litus and equivalent QoL to individuals with asthma, end-stage renal disease, and structural heart disease.
725 
In a hospital-based cohort of patients with a prior epi-sode of syncope, 33% reported syncope-related func-
tional impairments with daily activities, such as driving 
or working.
732 Those with more frequent syncope have 
reported poorer QoL.726,729,730,732 There is consistent evi-
dence that syncope is associated with worse function 
on multiple domains of QoL, such as perceptions of 
low overall physical health725,730,734; perception of men-
tal health, including increased fear, somatization, de-
pression, and anxiety725,727,728,731,734; and impairment in 
activities of daily living, such as driving, working, and attending school.
QoL impairments associated with syncope improve 
over time.
733 In the Fainting Assessment Study,733 gen-
eral and syncope-specific QoL improved over a 1-year 
period. Predictors of worse QoL over time include ad-vanced age, recurrent syncope, neurological or psy-
chogenic reason for syncope, and greater comorbidity 
at baseline.733 Syncope-related QoL can be improved 
through effective diagnosis and treatment. In 1 study, use of an implantable loop recorder increased diagnos-
tic rate, reduced syncope recurrence, and improved QoL 
as compared with patients who received a conventional 
diagnostic workup.
164 In a second study, nonpharmaco-
logical treatment of recurrent syncope was associated 
with reductions in recurrent syncope and improvements 
in QoL.729
11.2. Healthcare Costs Associated  
with Syncope
High healthcare costs are associated with the evalua-
tion and management of syncope. Costs are defined 
as the resources needed to produce a set of services 
and are distinct from charges billed by facilities and 
healthcare providers.735 Most studies have focused on 
facility costs and excluded professional fees and patient copays. These high costs have been estimated both in 
the United States and abroad. In the US Healthcare Uti-
lization Project, total annual hospital costs exceeded 
$4.1 billion in 2014 dollars, with a mean cost of $9400 
per admission.
736 Total costs and costs per admission 
for presumptive undiagnosed syncope were $1.6 billion and $7200, respectively.
736 Single-center studies from 
multiple countries, including Austria, the United King-dom, Israel, and Spain, confirm similarly high costs asso-
ciated with the hospital evaluation of syncope.
122,737,738
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on November 12, 2025

2017 ACC/AHA/HRS Syncope Guideline
Circulation. 2017;136:e60–e122. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000499 August 1, 2017
 e95
CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINESTable 9. Conditions Uncommonly Associated with Syncope
Condition Clinical Characteristics Notes
Cardiovascular and Cardiopulmonary
  Cardiac tamponade Hypotension, tachycardia, cardiogenic shock. Often tachycardia and hypotension; may be 
hypotensive and bradycardic acutely.
  Constrictive 
pericarditis533–535Severe HF symptoms, including edema, exertional dyspnea, orthopnea.May be associated with cough syncope.
  LV noncompaction
536–539Cardiomyopathy characterized by prominent LV trabeculae and deep intertrabecular recesses, due to embryologic perturbation.Syncope reported in 5%–9% of both adult and pediatric patients. The mechanism may be a 
tachyarrhythmia.
  Takotsubo 
cardiomyopathy
540,541Apical ballooning and basal hypercontractility, often due to 
stress. Chest pain and ECG changes consistent with ischemia are 
commonly seen.Syncope is uncommon and may be multifactorial.
  Pulmonary embolus128,542,543Hypoxemia, tachycardia; hypotension and shock leading to 
pulseless electrical activity cardiac arrest in severe cases.Syncope due to bradycardia and/or hypotension.One study showed higher prevalence of pulmonary 
embolus in older patients with first episode of syncope 
after admission to the hospital. Further confirmation of 
this finding in the older populations is warranted.
  Pulmonary arterial 
hypertensionOccurs more often during exertion in younger patients. Syncope due to inability to augment or sustain cardiac output during exertion, followed by vasodilatation.
Infiltrative
  Fabry disease
544,545Lysosomal storage disorder with neuropathic pain, renal failure 
concentric LVH, and HF.Syncope usually due to AV block.
  Amyloidosis546,547Systemic disease due to amyloid deposition. Light chain amyloidosis affects the kidneys, heart, and peripheral and 
autonomic nervous systems.Syncope may be due to conduction system disease, 
arrhythmias, impaired cardiac output from restrictive 
cardiomyopathy, or neurological involvement. AV 
block is the likely cause, although VA may occur with 
myocardial involvement.
  Hemochromatosis
548Systemic iron deposition causing liver disease, skin pigmentation, 
diabetes mellitus, arthropathy, impotence, and dilated 
cardiomyopathy.Myocardial involvement more common than sick sinus 
syndrome and AV conduction disease.
Infectious
  Myocarditis413,549–553Chest pain, arrhythmias, or profound LV systolic dysfunction. 
Hemodynamic collapse may occur.VT and AV block are the likely causes of syncope; transient hemodynamic collapse is possible.
  Lyme disease
554Lyme myocarditis with classical features of Lyme disease, including erythema migraines and neurological manifestations.Syncope may be due to AV block, but many patients manifest V VS.
554,555
  Chagas disease556–559Chagasic cardiomyopathy caused by trypanosomiasis. Syncope and sudden death associated with ventricular tachyarrhythmias. AV block also occurs.
Neuromuscular
  Myotonic dystrophy
12,560,561Autosomal dominant inheritance with multiple organ systems 
affected. Grip myotonia, weakness, temporal wasting, alopecia, 
cataracts, glucose intolerance, and daytime somnolence.Both bradyarrhythmia and tachyarrhythmias.
  Friedreich ataxia562,563Autosomal recessive inheritance with limb and gait ataxia, bladder 
dysfunction, and daytime somnolence. Diffuse interstitial fibrosis 
and HCM.Syncope can be bradycardic or tachycardic. SCD is 
known to occur.
  Kearns-Sayre 
Syndrome564,565Mitochondrial myopathy. Chronic progressive external ophthalmoplegia; pigmentary retinopathy.Many patients develop significant His-Purkinje disease.
  Erb dystrophy
566Limb girdle muscular dystrophy, manifesting as scapulohymeral and/or pelvifemoral weakness and atrophy.AV conduction disease, dilated cardiomyopathy.
Anatomic
  Lenègre-Lev disease
567–571Progressive fibrosis and sclerosis of cardiac conduction system, 
including the cardiac skeleton, including the aortic and mitral 
rings.Syncope is usually due to high-grade AV block.
  Cardiac tumors572Triad of obstruction, embolic, and systemic signs and symptoms. Syncope is often due to obstruction to blood flow.
  Prosthetic valve 
thrombosis573–575Ranges from asymptomatic to profound HF. May have similar presentation to a cardiac tumor, with 
a high risk of embolic phenomenon and obstruction.
  Anomalous coronary 
artery576–579Common cause of exertional syncope or SCD, classically in young athletes.Syncope can be due to Bezold Jarisch reflex, hypotension, VT, or AV block.
(Continued )
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on November 12, 2025

Shen et al
August 1, 2017 Circulation. 2017;136:e60–e122. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000499 e96
Several investigators have estimated the costs per 
clinically meaningful test result. Physician reviewers de-
termined whether the results of a diagnostic test affect-ed clinical management at a US tertiary referral hospital after an episode of syncope.
77 The cost per informative 
diagnosis (as ordered in routine practice) affecting clini-cal management varied widely by specific diagnostic test, from postural blood pressure ($50) through te-lemetry ($1100) to EEG ($32 973).
77 Similar high costs 
per actionable diagnosis occur in children admitted for new-onset syncope. Finally, mean costs per diagnostic result were also high in an outpatient ($19 900) spe-
cialty clinic for unexplained recurrent syncope.
163
12. EMERGING TECHNOLOGY, 
EVIDENCE GAPS, AND FUTURE 
DIRECTIONS
The writing committee created a list of key areas in 
which knowledge gaps are present in the evaluation and management of patients presenting with syncope. 
These knowledge gaps present opportunities for future 
research to ultimately improve clinical outcomes and ef-fectiveness of healthcare delivery.
12.1. Definition, Classification, and 
Epidemiology
Reported incidence and prevalence of syncope vary sig-
nificantly because of several confounders: variable defini-tions for syncope versus transient loss of consciousness, different populations, different clinical settings, and dif-
ferent study methodologies. Definition and classification 
of syncope provided in this document will set the stan-dard for future research. Standardized national registries 
and large sample databases are needed to gather data 
on a continuous basis to understand the true incidence and prevalence of syncope, understand patient risk, in-form driving policies, improve patient outcomes, and improve and streamline health service delivery.  Aortic dissection580–582Aortic dissection may manifest with neurological symptoms, 
myocardial infarction, and HF. Syncope can occur in as many as 
13% of aortic dissections.The risk of in-hospital death, tamponade, and 
neurological deficits is higher in patients with syncope. 
Otherwise, syncope alone does not appear to increase 
the risk of death.
  Subclavian steal583–587The phenomenon of flow reversal in a vertebral artery ipsilateral to a hemodynamically significant stenosis of the subclavian artery. 
Severe cases resulting in vertebrobasilar ischemia may rarely result 
in syncope.Syncope is generally associated with upper-extremity activity.
  Coarctation of the aorta
588If severe, it can result in HF or aortic dissection. Associated bicuspid aortic valve stenosis may be considered with syncope.
  Rheumatoid arthritis
589Chronic, autoimmune inflammatory disorder with systemic manifestations.Rarely associated with complete heart block and syncope.
  Syringomyelia
590–597
  Chiari malformation598Arnold Chiari malformations are the most common form of syringomyelia.Syringomyelia-induced disruption of sympathetic fibers in the thoracic spinal cord is a rare mechanism of 
syncope.
599
  Neck/vagal tumor600,601Recurrent syncope is an uncommon complication of neck 
malignancy.The mechanism may be invasion of the carotid sinus or the afferent nerve fibers of the glossopharyngeal nerve.
Endocrine
  Carcinoid syndrome
602 
Pheochromocytoma602,603
  Mastocytosis602–609 
Vasoactive intestinal 
peptide tumorThese tumors can release vasoactive peptides and cause vasodilation, flushing, pruritus, and gastrointestinal symptoms.Syncope is usually due to transient hypotension.
Hematologic
  Beta thalassemia major
610Severe anemia, multiple organ failure, and dilated cardiomyopathy 
due to iron overload.Syncope may be arrhythmic.
Neurological disorders
  Seizure-induced 
bradycardia/
hypotension611–614Generally due to temporal lobe epilepsy. Postictal bradyarrhythmia is uncommon and likely 
originates from the temporal lobe or limbic system.
  Migraine615,616Migraine headaches are statistically associated with syncope. Syncope may be vasovagal or due to orthostatic intolerance.
ACC indicates American College of Cardiology; AHA, American Heart Association; AV, atrioventricular; ECG, electrocardiogram; HCM, hypertrophic 
cardiomyopathy; HF, heart failure; HRS, Heart Rhythm Society; LV, left ventricular; LVH, left ventricular hypertrophy; SCD, sudden cardiac death; VA, ventricular arrhythmias; VT, ventricular tachycardia; and V VS, vasovagal syncope.Table 9. Continued
Condition Clinical Characteristics Notes
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on November 12, 2025

2017 ACC/AHA/HRS Syncope Guideline
Circulation. 2017;136:e60–e122. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000499 August 1, 2017
 e97
CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINES12.2. Risk Stratification and Clinical 
Outcomes
At a patient’s presentation, several key questions fol-
low: What is the likely cause of syncope? Does the pa-tient have significant underlying heart disease and/or 
comorbid medical illnesses? If the cause of syncope is determined, is there an effective therapy to prevent re-current syncope, prevent syncope-related nonfatal out-comes (injury, diminished healthcare–related QoL, lost workdays), or improve survival? What are the predictors of short- and long-term clinical outcomes? What are the key outcomes relevant to patients with syncope, in-cluding recurrent syncope? When the cause of syncope is unknown, what is the standard of care for this group of patients?
• Studies are needed to determine whether syncope is an independent predictor of nonfatal or fatal outcomes in selected patient populations.
• Studies are needed to develop risk scores to be prospectively validated in a given clinical setting 
with predefined endpoints from short- and long-
term follow-up.
• Prospective and well-designed studies are needed to define relevant clinical outcomes with regard to recurrent syncope, nonfatal outcomes such as injury, and fatal outcomes. Future studies should incorporate QoL, work loss, and functional capac-ity as additional clinical endpoints.
• Prospective studies are needed to differentiate cardiac and noncardiac clinical outcomes in differ -
ent clinical settings and with different follow-up durations.
• Among patients without identifiable causes of syn-cope, studies are needed to determine short- and 
long-term outcomes to guide the overall manage-
ment of these patients.
12.3. Evaluation and Diagnosis
Because of the concerns that patients presenting with syncope are at higher risk for an impending catastroph-ic event, overuse and inappropriate use of testing and hospital admission are common. Answers to the fol-lowing question will improve the effectiveness of pa-tient evaluation: How should the initial evaluation and subsequent follow-up vary by risk (low, intermediate, or 
high) to assess clinical outcomes?
• Studies are needed to better understand the inter -
action and relationships among the presenting 
symptom of syncope, the cause of syncope, the underlying disease condition, and their effect on clinical outcomes.
• Investigations are needed to understand the key components of clinical characteristics during the initial evaluation and to develop standardiza-tion tools to guide the evaluation by healthcare team.
• RCTs are needed to develop structured pro-tocols to evaluate patients with syncope who are at intermediate risk without an immediate Table 10. Avoidance of Private Driving After an 
Episode of Syncope: Suggested Symptom-Free Waiting 
Times for Various Conditions
ConditionSymptom-Free 
Waiting Time*
OH 1 month
V VS, no syncope in prior year698No restriction
V VS, 1–6 syncope per year6941 month
V VS, >6 syncope per year694,698Not fit to drive until 
symptoms resolved
Situational syncope other than cough syncope 1 month
Cough syncope, untreated Not fit to drive
Cough syncope, treated with cough suppression 1 month
Carotid sinus syncope, untreated698Not fit to drive
Carotid sinus syncope, treated with permanent 
pacemaker6981 week
Syncope due to nonreflex bradycardia, 
untreated698Not fit to drive
Syncope due to nonreflex bradycardia, treated with permanent pacemaker
12,6981 week
Syncope due to SVT, untreated698Not fit to drive
Syncope due to SVT, pharmacologically 
suppressed6981 month
Syncope due to SVT, treated with ablation6981 week
Syncope with LVEF <35% and a presumed arrhythmic etiology without an ICD
699,700Not fit to drive
Syncope with LVEF <35% and presumed 
arrhythmic etiology with an ICD701,7023 months
Syncope presumed due to VT/VF, structural heart disease, and LVEF ≥35%, untreatedNot fit to drive
Syncope presumed due to VT/VF, structural heart disease, and LVEF ≥35%, treated with an ICD and guideline-directed drug therapy
701,7023 months
Syncope presumed due to VT with a genetic 
cause, untreatedNot fit to drive
Syncope presumed due to VT with a genetic 
cause, treated with an ICD or guideline-directed 
drug therapy3 months
Syncope presumed due to a nonstructural heart 
disease VT, such as RVOT or LVOT, untreatedNot fit to drive
Syncope presumed due to a nonstructural heart disease VT, such as RVOT or LVOT, treated 
successfully with ablation or suppressed 
pharmacologically
6983 months
Syncope of undetermined etiology 1 month
*It may be prudent to wait and observe for this time without a syncope 
spell before resuming driving.
ICD indicates implantable cardioverter-defibrillator; LVEF, left ventricular 
ejection fraction; LVOT, left ventricular outflow tract; OH, orthostatic 
hypotension; RVOT, right ventricular outflow tract; SVT, supraventricular 
tachycardia; VF, ventricular fibrillation; VT, ventricular tachycardia; and V VS, 
vasovagal syncope.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on November 12, 2025

Shen et al
August 1, 2017 Circulation. 2017;136:e60–e122. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000499
 e98presumptive diagnosis. In addition to the end-
points of diagnostic yield and healthcare utiliza-tion, relevant clinical endpoints of nonfatal and 
fatal outcomes and recurrence of syncope are to 
be included.
• RCTs are needed to determine the features of 
syncope-specialized facilities that are necessary to 
achieve beneficial outcomes for patient care and to improve efficiency and effectiveness of health-care delivery.
• As technology advances, studies are needed to determine the value of new technology in the evaluation and management of patients with syncope.
12.4. Management of Specific  
Conditions
• Although potential causes of syncope are multi-
ple, a treatment decision is usually fairly straight-forward for patients with cardiac causes of 
syncope or orthostatic causes. V VS is the most 
common cause of syncope in the general popu-lation. Treatment remains challenging in patients 
who have recurrences despite conservative ther -
apy. Studies are needed to differentiate “arrhyth-mic syncope” versus “nonarrhythmic syncope” versus “aborted SCD” in patients with inheritable arrhythmic conditions.
• Prospectively designed multicenter or national registries are needed to gather clinical informa-
tion from patients with reflex syncope to better 
our understanding on other associated conditions, plausible mechanisms, effectiveness of therapeutic interventions, and natural history of these uncom-mon conditions.
• RCTs are needed to continue the identification of effective treatment approaches to patients with 
recurrent reflex syncope.
12.5. Special Populations
• Each population in Section 6 is unique with regard 
to syncope, and within each of them we identi-fied several key areas that are important for future research considerations.
• Questions and research about risk stratification, evaluation, and management outlined above for 
the adult population are needed in the pediatric 
population, geriatric population, and athletes.
• Prospective national registries and big databases 
are needed to determine risk associated with driv-
ing among different populations with syncope.
• Prospective and randomized studies are needed to 
assess the usefulness of specialized syncope units in different clinical settings.ACC/AHA TASK FORCE MEMBERS
Glenn N. Levine, MD, FACC, FAHA, Chair; Patrick T. O’Gara, 
MD, MACC, FAHA, Chair-Elect; Jonathan L. Halperin, MD, FACC, FAHA, Immediate Past Chair*; Sana M. Al-Khatib, MD, MHS, FACC, FAHA; Kim K. Birtcher, MS, PharmD, AACC; Bi-
ykem Bozkurt, MD, PhD, FACC, FAHA; Ralph G. Brindis, MD, 
MPH, MACC*; Joaquin E. Cigarroa, MD, FACC; Lesley H. 
Curtis, PhD, FAHA; Lee A. Fleisher, MD, FACC, FAHA; Fed-
erico Gentile, MD, FACC; Samuel Gidding, MD, FAHA; Mark A. Hlatky, MD, FACC; John Ikonomidis, MD, PhD, FAHA; José 
Joglar, MD, FACC, FAHA; Susan J. Pressler, PhD, RN, FAHA; 
Duminda N. Wijeysundera, MD, PhD
PRESIDENTS AND STAFF
American College of Cardiology
Richard A. Chazal, MD, FACC, President
Shalom Jacobovitz, Chief Executive OfficerWilliam J. Oetgen, MD, MBA, FACC, Executive Vice President, 
Science, Education, Quality, and Publishing
Amelia Scholtz, PhD, Publications Manager, Science, Educa-
tion, Quality, and Publishing
American College of Cardiology/
American Heart Association
Katherine Sheehan, PhD, Director, Guideline Strategy and 
Operations
Lisa Bradfield, CAE, Director, Guideline Methodology and Policy
Abdul R. Abdullah, MD, Science and Medicine Advisor
Clara Fitzgerald, Project Manager, Science and Clinical Policy
Allison Rabinowitz, MPH, Project Manager, Science and 
Clinical Policy
American Heart Association
Steven R. Houser, PhD, FAHA, PresidentNancy Brown, Chief Executive OfficerRose Marie Robertson, MD, FAHA, Chief Science and Medi-
cine Officer
Gayle R. Whitman, PhD, RN, FAHA, FAAN, Senior Vice Presi-
dent, Office of Science Operations
Jody Hundley, Production Manager, Scientific Publications, 
Office of Science Operations
FOOTNOTES
This document was approved by the American College of Car -
diology Clinical Policy Approval Committee on behalf of the Board of Trustees, the American Heart Association Science 
Advisory and Coordinating Committee, the American Heart 
Association Executive Committee, and the Heart Rhythm So-ciety Board of Trustees in January 2017.
*Former Task Force member; current member during the writing 
effort.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on November 12, 2025

2017 ACC/AHA/HRS Syncope Guideline
Circulation. 2017;136:e60–e122. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000499 August 1, 2017
 e99
CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINESThe online Comprehensive RWI Data Supplement table is 
available with this article at http://circ.ahajournals.org/look-
up/suppl/doi:10.1161/CIR.0000000000000499/-/DC1.
The online Data Supplement is available with this article at  
http://circ.ahajournals.org/lookup/suppl/doi:10.1161/CIR.0000000000000499/-/DC2.
This article has been copublished in the Journal of the 
American College of Cardiology and HeartRhythm.
Copies: This document is available on the World Wide 
Web sites of the American College of Cardiology (www.acc.
org), the American Heart Association (professional.heart.org), 
and the Heart Rhythm Society (www.hrsonline.org). A copy 
of the document is available at http://professional.heart.org/statements by selecting either the “By Topic” link or the “By Publication Date” link. To purchase additional reprints, call 843-216-2533 or e-mail kelle.ramsay@wolterskluwer.com.
Expert peer review of AHA Scientific Statements is con-
ducted by the AHA Office of Science Operations. For more on AHA statements and guidelines development, visit http://professional.heart.org/statements and select the “Policies and Development” link.
Permissions: Multiple copies, modification, alteration, en-
hancement, and/or distribution of this document are not per -
mitted without the express permission of the American Heart 
Association. Instructions for obtaining permission are located 
at http://www.heart.org/HEARTORG/General/Copyright- Permission-Guidelines_UCM_300404_Article.jsp. A link to the “Copyright Permissions Request Form” appears on the right side of the page.
Circulation is available at http://circ.ahajournals.org.
REFERENCES
 1. Committee on Standards for Developing Trustworthy Clinical Practice 
Guidelines, Institute of Medicine (U.S.). Clinical Practice Guidelines We Can Trust. Washington, DC: National Academies Press; 2011.
 2. Committee on Standards for Systematic Reviews of Comparative Effec-
tiveness Research, Institute of Medicine (U.S.). Finding What Works in 
Health Care: Standards for Systematic Reviews. Washington, DC: National Academies Press; 2011.
 3. Anderson JL, Heidenreich PA, Barnett PG, et al. ACC/AHA statement on cost/value methodology in clinical practice guidelines and performance measures: a report of the American College of Cardiology/American Heart Association Task Force on Performance Measures and Task Force on Prac-tice Guidelines. Circulation. 2014;129:2329–45.
 4. ACCF/AHA Task Force on Practice Guidelines. Methodology Manual and Policies 
From the ACCF/AHA Task Force on Practice Guidelines. American College of 
Cardiology and American Heart Association, 2010. Available at: http://assets.
cardiosource.com/Methodology_Manual_for_ACC_AHA_Writing_Commit-
tees.pdf and http://my.americanheart.org/idc/groups/ahamah-public/@wcm/@
sop/documents/downloadable/ucm_319826.pdf. Accessed January 23, 2015.
 5. Halperin JL, Levine GN, Al-Khatib SM, et al. Further evolution of the ACC/AHA 
clinical practice guideline recommendation classification system: a report of the American College of Cardiology Foundation/ American Heart Association 
Task Force on Clinical Practice Guidelines. Circulation. 2016;133:1426–28.
 6. Jacobs AK, Kushner FG, Ettinger SM, et al. ACCF/AHA clinical practice guideline methodology summit report: a report of the American College 
of Cardiology Foundation/American Heart Association Task Force on Prac-
tice Guidelines. Circulation. 2013;127:268–310.
 7. Jacobs AK, Anderson JL, Halperin JL. The evolution and future of ACC/
AHA clinical practice guidelines: a 30-year journey: a report of the Ameri-can College of Cardiology/American Heart Association Task Force on Prac-tice Guidelines. Circulation. 2014;130:1208–17.
 8. Arnett DK, Goodman RA, Halperin JL, et al. AHA/ACC/HHS strategies to enhance application of clinical practice guidelines in patients with cardio-vascular disease and comorbid conditions: from the American Heart As-sociation, American College of Cardiology, and U.S. Department of Health 
and Human Services. Circulation. 2014;130:1662–7.
 9. Varosy PD, Chen LY, Miller AL, et al. Pacing as a treatment for reflex-me-diated (vasovagal, situational, or carotid sinus hypersensitivity) syncope: 
a systematic review for the 2017 ACC/AHA/HRS guideline for the evalu-
ation and management of syncope: a report of the American College of Cardiology/American Heart Association Task Force on Clinical Practice 
Guidelines and the Heart Rhythm Society. Circulation. 2017;136:e123–
135.
 10. Page RL, Joglar JA, Caldwell MA, et al. 2015 ACC/AHA/HRS guideline for the management of adult patients with supraventricular tachycardia: a report of the American College of Cardiology/American Heart Association 
Task Force on Clinical Practice Guidelines and the Heart Rhythm Society. 
Circulation. 2016;133;e506–74.
 11. Nishimura RA, Otto CM, Bonow RO, et al. 2014 AHA/ACC guideline for the management of patients with valvular heart disease: a report of the 
American College of Cardiology/American Heart Association Task Force 
on Practice Guidelines. Circulation. 2014;129:2440–92.
 12. Epstein AE, DiMarco JP , Ellenbogen KA, et al. 2012 ACCF/AHA/HRS fo-
cused update incorporated into the ACCF/AHA/HRS 2008 guidelines for 
device-based therapy of cardiac rhythm abnormalities: a report of the 
American College of Cardiology Foundation/American Heart Association 
Task Force on Practice Guidelines and the Heart Rhythm Society. Circula-tion. 2013;127:e283–352.
 13. Zipes DP , Camm AJ, Borggrefe M, et al. ACC/AHA/ESC 2006 guidelines for management of patients with ventricular arrhythmias and the pre-
vention of sudden cardiac death: a report of the American College of 
Cardiology/American Heart Association Task Force and the European So-ciety of Cardiology Committee for Practice Guidelines (Writing Commit-
tee to Develop Guidelines for Management of Patients With Ventricular 
Arrhythmias and the Prevention of Sudden Cardiac Death). Circulation. 2006;114:1088–132.
 14. Fihn SD, Blankenship JC, Alexander KP , et al. 2014 ACC/AHA/AATS/PCNA/SCAI/STS focused update of the guideline for the diagnosis and man-agement of patients with stable ischemic heart disease: a report of the 
American College of Cardiology/American Heart Association Task Force 
on Practice Guidelines, and the American Association for Thoracic Sur -
gery, Preventive Cardiovascular Nurses Association, Society for Cardiovas-cular Angiography and Interventions, and Society of Thoracic Surgeons. Circulation. 2014;130:1749–67.
 15. Fihn SD, Gardin JM, Abrams J, et al. 2012 ACCF/AHA/ACP/AATS/PCNA/SCAI/STS guideline for the diagnosis and management of pa-
tients with stable ischemic heart disease: a report of the American 
College of Cardiology Foundation/American Heart Association Task Force on Practice Guidelines, and the American College of Physicians, American Association for Thoracic Surgery, Preventive Cardiovascular 
Nurses Association, Society for Cardiovascular Angiography and Inter -
ventions, and Society of Thoracic Surgeons. J Am Coll Cardiol. Circula-tion. 2012;126:e354–471.
 16. January CT, Wann LS, Alpert JS, et al. 2014 AHA/ACC/HRS guide-
line for the management of patients with atrial fibrillation: a report of 
the American College of Cardiology/American Heart Association Task 
Force on Practice Guidelines and the Heart Rhythm Society. Circulation 
2014;130:e199–267.
 17. Amsterdam EA, Wenger NK, Brindis RG, et al. 2014 AHA/ACC guide-
line for the management of patients with non-ST-elevation acute coro-
nary syndromes: a report of the American College of Cardiology/Ameri-
can Heart Association Task Force on Practice Guidelines. Circulation. 
2014;130:e344–426.
 18. Goff DC Jr, Lloyd-Jones DM, Bennett G, et al. 2013 ACC/AHA guideline 
on the assessment of cardiovascular risk: a report of the American College of Cardiology/American Heart Association Task Force on Practice Guide-lines. Circulation. 2014;129[suppl 2]:S49–73.
 19. Yancy CW, Jessup M, Bozkurt B, et al. 2013 ACCF/AHA guideline for the management of heart failure: a report of the American College of Cardiol-
ogy Foundation/American Heart Association Task Force on Practice Guide-
lines. Circulation. 2013;128:e240–327.
 20. Gersh BJ, Maron BJ, Bonow RO, et al. 2011 ACCF/AHA guideline for the 
diagnosis and treatment of hypertrophic cardiomyopathy: a report of the 
American College of Cardiology Foundation/American Heart Association 
Task Force on Practice Guidelines. Developed in collaboration with the 
American Association for Thoracic Surgery, American Society of Echocar -
diography, American Society of Nuclear Cardiology, Heart Failure Society 
of America, Heart Rhythm Society, Society for Cardiovascular Angiog-
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on November 12, 2025

Shen et al
August 1, 2017 Circulation. 2017;136:e60–e122. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000499
 e100raphy and Interventions, and Society of Thoracic Surgeons. Circulation. 
2011;124:e783–831.
 21. Greenland P , Alpert JS, Beller GA, et al. 2010 ACCF/AHA guideline for assessment of cardiovascular risk in asymptomatic adults: a report of the 
American College of Cardiology Foundation/American Heart Association 
Task Force on Practice Guidelines. Circulation. 2010;122:e584–636.
 22. Warnes CA, Williams RG, Bashore TM, et al. ACC/AHA 2008 guidelines 
for the management of adults with congenital heart disease: a report 
of the American College of Cardiology/American Heart Association Task 
Force on Practice Guidelines (Writing Committee to Develop Guidelines 
on the Management of Adults With Congenital Heart Disease). Developed in collaboration with the American Society of Echocardiography, Heart 
Rhythm Society, International Society for Adult Congenital Heart Disease, 
Society for Cardiovascular Angiography and Interventions, and Society of 
Thoracic Surgeons. Circulation. 2008;118:e714–833.
 23. Patton KK, Ellinor PT, Ezekowitz M, et al. Electrocardiographic early re-
polarization: a scientific statement from the American Heart Association. 
Circulation. 2016;133:1520–9.
 24. Sheldon RS, Grubb BP , Olshansky B, et al. 2015 Heart Rhythm Society 
expert consensus statement on the diagnosis and treatment of postural 
tachycardia syndrome, inappropriate sinus tachycardia, and vasovagal 
syncope. Heart Rhythm. 2015;12:e41–63.
 25. Priori SG, Wilde AA, Horie M, et al. HRS/EHRA/APHRS expert consensus 
statement on the diagnosis and management of patients with inherited 
primary arrhythmia syndromes: document endorsed by HRS, EHRA, and 
APHRS in May 2013 and by ACCF, AHA, PACES, and AEPC in June 2013. 
Heart Rhythm. 2013;10:1932–63.
 26. Priori SG, Blomstrom-Lundqvist C, Mazzanti A, et al. 2015 ESC Guidelines 
for the management of patients with ventricular arrhythmias and the pre-
vention of sudden cardiac death. The Task Force for the Management of 
Patients with Ventricular Arrhythmias and the Prevention of Sudden Car -
diac Death of the European Society of Cardiology. G Ital Cardiol (Rome). 
2016;17:108–70.
 27. Khairy P , Van Hare GF, Balaji S, et al. PACES/HRS expert consensus state-
ment on the recognition and management of arrhythmias in adult con-
genital heart disease: developed in partnership between the Pediatric and 
Congenital Electrophysiology Society (PACES) and the Heart Rhythm Soci-
ety (HRS). Can J Cardiol. 2014;30:e1–e63.
 28. Kusumoto FM, Calkins H, Boehmer J, et al. HRS/ACC/AHA expert consen-
sus statement on the use of implantable cardioverter-defibrillator therapy 
in patients who are not included or not well represented in clinical trials. 
Circulation. 2014;130:94–125.
 29. Pedersen CT, Kay GN, Kalman J, et al. EHRA/HRS/APHRS expert consensus on ventricular arrhythmias. Heart Rhythm. 2014;11:e166–e196.
 30. Moya A, Sutton R, Ammirati F, et al. Guidelines for the diagnosis and management of syncope (version 2009). Eur Heart J. 2009;30:2631–71.
 31. Freeman R, Wieling W, Axelrod FB, et al. Consensus statement on the definition of orthostatic hypotension, neurally mediated syncope and the 
postural tachycardia syndrome. Clin Auton Res. 2011;21:69–72.
 32. Wieling W, Krediet CT, van DN, et al. Initial orthostatic hypotension: re-
view of a forgotten condition. Clin Sci. 2007;112:157–65.
 33. Metzler M, Duerr S, Granata R, et al. Neurogenic orthostatic hypo-tension: pathophysiology, evaluation, and management. J Neurol. 
2013;260:2212–9.
 34. Nwazue VC, Raj SR. Confounders of vasovagal syncope: orthostatic hypo-
tension. Cardiol Clin. 2013;31:89–100.
 35. Soteriades ES, Evans JC, Larson MG, et al. Incidence and prognosis of syncope. N Engl J Med. 2002;347:878–85.
 36. Kapoor WN, Karpf M, Wieand S, et al. A prospective evaluation and follow-up of patients with syncope. N Engl J Med. 1983;309: 197–204.
 37. Thieben MJ, Sandroni P , Sletten DM, et al. Postural orthostatic tachycardia syndrome: the Mayo Clinic experience. Mayo Clin Proc. 2007;82:308–13.
 38. Low PA, Sandroni P , Joyner M, et al. Postural tachycardia syndrome (POTS). J Cardiovasc Electrophysiol. 2009;20:352–8.
 39. Low PA, Opfer-Gehrking TL, Textor SC, et al. Postural tachycardia syn-drome (POTS). Neurology. 1995;45:S19–25.
 40. Schondorf R, Low PA. Idiopathic postural orthostatic tachycardia syn-
drome: an attenuated form of acute pandysautonomia? Neurology. 
1993;43:132–7.
 41. Singer W, Sletten DM, Opfer-Gehrking TL, et al. Postural tachycardia in children and adolescents: what is abnormal? J Pediatr. 2012;160:222–6.
 42. Garland EM, Raj SR, Black BK, et al. The hemodynamic and neurohumoral 
phenotype of postural tachycardia syndrome. Neurology. 2007;69:790–8. 43. Lamb LE. Incidence of loss of consciousness in 1,980 Air Force personnel. 
Aerosp Med. 1960;31:973–88.
 44. Chen LY, Shen WK, Mahoney DW, et al. Prevalence of syncope in a popu-lation aged more than 45 years. Am J Med. 2006;119:e1–e7.
 45. Ruwald MH, Hansen ML, Lamberts M, et al. The relation between age, sex, comorbidity, and pharmacotherapy and the risk of syncope: Danish nationwide study. Europace. 2012;14:1506–14.
 46. Olshansky B, Poole JE, Johnson G, et al. Syncope predicts the outcome of cardiomyopathy patients: analysis of the SCD-HeFT study. J Am Coll 
Cardiol. 2008;51:1277–82.
 47. Middlekauff HR, Stevenson WG, Stevenson LW, et al. Syncope in ad-
vanced heart failure: high risk of sudden death regardless of origin of 
syncope. J Am Coll Cardiol. 1993;21:110–6.
 48. Sun BC, Emond JA, Camargo CA Jr, Characteristics and admission pat-
terns of patients presenting with syncope to U.S. emergency depart-
ments, 1992–2000. Acad Emerg Med. 2004;11:1029–34.
 49. Morichetti A, Astorino G. [Epidemiological and clinical findings in 697 
syncope events]. Minerva Med. 1998;89:211–20.
 50. Ruwald MH, Hansen ML, Lamberts M, et al. Accuracy of the ICD-10 dis-
charge diagnosis for syncope. Europace. 2013;15:595–600.
 51. Olde Nordkamp LR.A, van Dijk N, Ganzeboom KS, et al. Syncope preva-lence in the ED compared to general practice and population: a strong 
selection process. Am J Emerg Med. 2009;27:271–9.
 52. Ammirati F, Colivicchi F, Minardi G, et al. [The management of syncope in 
the hospital: the OESIL Study (Osservatorio Epidemiologico della Sincope 
nel Lazio)]. G Ital Cardiol. 1999;29:533–9.
 53. Blanc JJ, L’Her C, Touiza A, et al. Prospective evaluation and outcome of patients admitted for syncope over a 1 year period. Eur Heart J. 2002;23:815–20.
 54. Disertori M, Brignole M, Menozzi C, et al. Management of patients with syncope referred urgently to general hospitals. Europace. 2003;5:283–91.
 55. Day SC, Cook EF, Funkenstein H, et al. Evaluation and outcome of emer -
gency room patients with transient loss of consciousness. Am J Med. 1982;73:15–23.
 56. Lipsitz LA, Wei JY, Rowe JW. Syncope in an elderly, institutionalised pop-
ulation: prevalence, incidence, and associated risk. Q J Med. 1985;55: 
45–54.
 57. Kenny RA, Bhangu J, King-Kallimanis BL. Epidemiology of syncope/col-lapse in younger and older Western patient populations. Prog Cardiovasc Dis. 2013;55:357–63.
 58. Alboni P , Brignole M, Menozzi C, et al. Diagnostic value of history in patients with syncope with or without heart disease. J Am Coll Cardiol. 
2001;37:1921–8.
 59. Alboni P , Brignole M, Menozzi C, et al. Clinical spectrum of neurally medi-
ated reflex syncopes. Europace. 2004;6:55–62.
 60. Berecki-Gisolf J, Sheldon A, Wieling W, et al. Identifying cardiac syncope 
based on clinical history: a literature-based model tested in four indepen-
dent datasets. PLoS ONE. 2013;8:e75255
 61. Calkins H, Shyr Y, Frumin H, et al. The value of the clinical history in the differentiation of syncope due to ventricular tachycardia, atrioventricular block, and neurocardiogenic syncope. Am J Med. 1995;98:365–73.
 62. Romme JJ.M, van Dijk N, Boer KR, et al. Diagnosing vasovagal syncope based on quantitative history-taking: validation of the Calgary Syncope 
Symptom Score. Eur Heart J. 2009;30:2888–96.
 63. Sheldon R, Rose S, Ritchie D, et al. Historical criteria that distinguish 
syncope from seizures. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2002;40:142–8.
 64. Sheldon R, Rose S, Connolly S, et al. Diagnostic criteria for vasovagal syn-cope based on a quantitative history. Eur Heart J. 2006;27:344–50.
 65. Sheldon R, Hersi A, Ritchie D, et al. Syncope and structural heart disease: historical criteria for vasovagal syncope and ventricular tachycardia. J Car -
diovasc Electrophysiol. 2010;21:1358–64.
 66. Van Dijk N, Boer KR, Colman N, et al. High diagnostic yield and accuracy of history, physical examination, and ECG in patients with transient loss of 
consciousness in FAST: the Fainting Assessment study. J Cardiovasc Elec-
trophysiol. 2008;19:48–55.
 67. Colivicchi F, Ammirati F, Melina D, et al. Development and prospective validation of a risk stratification system for patients with syncope in the emergency department: the OESIL risk score. Eur Heart J. 2003;24:811–9.
 68. Costantino G, Perego F, Dipaola F, et al. Short- and long-term prognosis of syncope, risk factors, and role of hospital admission: results from the STePS 
(Short-Term Prognosis of Syncope) study. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2008;51:276–83.
 69. Del Rosso A, Ungar A, Maggi R, et al. Clinical predictors of cardiac synco-
pe at initial evaluation in patients referred urgently to a general hospital: 
the EGSYS score. Heart. 2008;94:1620–6.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on November 12, 2025

2017 ACC/AHA/HRS Syncope Guideline
Circulation. 2017;136:e60–e122. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000499 August 1, 2017
 e101
CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINES 70. Grossman SA, Fischer C, Lipsitz LA, et al. Predicting adverse outcomes in 
syncope. J Emerg Med. 2007;33:233–9.
 71. Martin GJ, Adams SL, Martin HG, et al. Prospective evaluation of syncope. Ann Emerg Med. 1984;13:499–504.
 72. Quinn JV, Stiell IG, McDermott DA, et al. Derivation of the San Francisco Syncope Rule to predict patients with short-term serious outcomes. Ann Emerg Med. 2004;43:224–32.
 73. Reed MJ, Newby DE, Coull AJ, et al. The ROSE (Risk Stratification of Syncope in the Emergency Department) study. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2010;55:713–21.
 74. Sarasin FP , Hanusa BH, Perneger T, et al. A risk score to predict arrhyth-mias in patients with unexplained syncope. Acad Emerg Med. 2003;10: 1312–7.
 75. Sun BC, Derose SF, Liang LJ, et al. Predictors of 30-day serious events in 
older patients with syncope. Ann Emerg Med. 2009;54:769–78.
 76. Pérez-Rodon J, Martínez-Alday J, Baron-Esquivias G, et al. Prognostic val-ue of the electrocardiogram in patients with syncope: data from the group 
for syncope study in the emergency room (GESINUR). Heart Rhythm. 
2014;11:2035–44.
 77. Mendu ML, McAvay G, Lampert R, et al. Yield of diagnostic tests 
in evaluating syncopal episodes in older patients. Arch Intern Med. 
2009;169:1299–305.
 78. Johnson PC, Ammar H, Zohdy W, et al. Yield of diagnostic tests and its impact on cost in adult patients with syncope presenting to a community hospital. South Med J. 2014;107:707–14.
 79. Quinn J, McDermott D. Electrocardiogram findings in emergency depart-ment patients with syncope. Acad Emerg Med. 2011;18:714–8.
 80. Sarasin FP , Junod AF, Carballo D, et al. Role of echocardiography in the evaluation of syncope: a prospective study. Heart. 2002;88:363–7.
 81. Thiruganasambandamoorthy V, Hess EP , Turko E, et al. Defining abnormal 
electrocardiography in adult emergency department syncope patients: the 
Ottawa Electrocardiographic Criteria. CJEM. 2012;14:248–58.
 82. Costantino G, Casazza G, Reed M, et al. Syncope risk stratification tools 
vs clinical judgment: an individual patient data meta-analysis. Am J Med. 
2014;127:1126.e13–25.
 83. D’Ascenzo F, Biondi-Zoccai G, Reed MJ, et al. Incidence, etiology and pre-
dictors of adverse outcomes in 43,315 patients presenting to the emer -
gency department with syncope: an international meta-analysis. Int J Car -
diol. 2013;167:57–62.
 84. Da Costa A, Gulian JL, Romeyer-Bouchard C, et al. Clinical predictors of 
cardiac events in patients with isolated syncope and negative electrophysi-
ologic study. Int J Cardiol. 2006;109:28–33.
 85. Derose SF, Gabayan GZ, Chiu VY, et al. Patterns and preexisting risk fac-tors of 30-day mortality after a primary discharge diagnosis of syncope or 
near syncope. Acad Emerg Med. 2012;19:488–96.
 86. Dipaola F, Costantino G, Perego F, et al. San Francisco Syncope Rule, Os-servatorio Epidemiologico sulla Sincope nel Lazio risk score, and clinical 
judgment in the assessment of short-term outcome of syncope. Am J 
Emerg Med. 2010;28:432–9.
 87. Expósito V, Guzmán JC, Orava M, et al. Usefulness of the Calgary Synco-pe Symptom Score for the diagnosis of vasovagal syncope in the elderly. Europace. 2013;15:1210–4.
 88. Gabayan GZ, Derose SF, Asch SM, et al. Predictors of short-term (seven-day) cardiac outcomes after emergency department visit for syncope. Am 
J Cardiol. 2010;105:82–6.
 89. Kayayurt K, Akoglu H, Limon O, et al. Comparison of existing syncope 
rules and newly proposed Anatolian syncope rule to predict short-term 
serious outcomes after syncope in the Turkish population. Int J Emerg 
Med. 2012;5:17
 90. Martin TP , Hanusa BH, Kapoor WN. Risk stratification of patients with syncope. Ann Emerg Med. 1997;29:459–66.
 91. Moazez F, Peter T, Simonson J, et al. Syncope of unknown origin: clinical, noninvasive, and electrophysiologic determinants of arrhythmia induc-tion and symptom recurrence during long-term follow-up. Am Heart J. 
1991;121:81–8.
 92. Numeroso F, Mossini G, Spaggiari E, et al. Syncope in the emergency department of a large northern Italian hospital: incidence, efficacy of a 
short-stay observation ward and validation of the OESIL risk score. Emerg Med J. 2010;27:653–8.
 93. Oh JH, Hanusa BH, Kapoor WN. Do symptoms predict cardiac arrhyth-mias and mortality in patients with syncope? Arch Intern Med. 1999;159: 
375–80.
 94. Quinn J, McDermott D, Stiell I, et al. Prospective validation of the San 
Francisco Syncope Rule to predict patients with serious outcomes. Ann 
Emerg Med. 2006;47:448–54. 95. Ruwald MH, Ruwald AC, Jons C, et al. Evaluation of the CHADS2 risk 
score on short- and long-term all-cause and cardiovascular mortality after 
syncope. Clin Cardiol. 2013;36:262–8.
 96. Saccilotto RT, Nickel CH, Bucher HC, et al. San Francisco Syncope Rule to predict short-term serious outcomes: a systematic review. CMAJ. 
2011;183:e1116–e1126.
 97. Serrano LA, Hess EP , Bellolio MF, et al. Accuracy and quality of clinical 
decision rules for syncope in the emergency department: a systematic 
review and meta-analysis. Ann Emerg Med. 2010;56:362–73.
 98. Sule S, Palaniswamy C, Aronow WS, et al. Etiology of syncope in patients hospitalized with syncope and predictors of mortality and rehospitaliza-tion for syncope at 27-month follow-up. Clin Cardiol. 2011;34:35–8.
 99. Recchia D, Barzilai B. Echocardiography in the evaluation of patients with 
syncope. J Gen Intern Med. 1995;10:649–55.
 100. Grossman SA, Babineau M, Burke L, et al. Applying the Boston syncope criteria to near syncope. J Emerg Med. 2012;43:958–63.
 101. Ungar A, Del Rosso A, Giada F, et al. Early and late outcome of treated 
patients referred for syncope to emergency department: the EGSYS 2 follow-up study. Eur Heart J. 2010;31:2021–6.
 102. Grossman SA, Chiu D, Lipsitz L, et al. Can elderly patients without risk factors be discharged home when presenting to the emergency depart-
ment with syncope? Arch Gerontol Geriatr. 2014;58:110–4.
 103. Numeroso F, Mossini G, Lippi G, et al. Evaluation of the current prog-
nostic role of heart diseases in the history of patients with syncope. 
Europace. 2014;16:1379–83.
 104. Khera S, Palaniswamy C, Aronow WS, et al. Predictors of mortality, re-hospitalization for syncope, and cardiac syncope in 352 consecutive el-
derly patients with syncope. J Am Med Dir Assoc. 2013;14:326–30.
 105. Daccarett M, Jetter TL, Wasmund SL, et al. Syncope in the emergency 
department: comparison of standardized admission criteria with clinical 
practice. Europace. 2011;13:1632–8.
 106. Sun BC, Thiruganasambandamoorthy V, Cruz JD. Standardized report-
ing guidelines for emergency department syncope risk-stratification re-
search. Acad Emerg Med. 2012;19:694–702.
 107. Shen WK, Decker WW, Smars PA, et al. Syncope Evaluation in the 
Emergency Department Study (SEEDS): a multidisciplinary approach to 
syncope management. Circulation. 2004;110:3636–45.
 108. Sun BC, McCreath H, Liang LJ, et al. Randomized clinical trial of an emergency department observation syncope protocol versus routine inpatient admission. Ann Emerg Med. 2014;64:167–75.
 109. Ungar A, Tesi F, Chisciotti VM, et al. Assessment of a structured manage-ment pathway for patients referred to the emergency department for 
syncope: results in a tertiary hospital. Europace. 2015;18:457–62.
 110. Shin TG, Kim JS, Song HG, et al. Standardized approaches to syncope 
evaluation for reducing hospital admissions and costs in overcrowded emergency departments. Yonsei Med J. 2013;54:1110–8.
 111. Parry SW, Frearson R, Steen N, et al. Evidence-based algorithms and the management of falls and syncope presenting to acute medical services. 
Clin Med (Lond). 2008;8:157–62.
 112. Raucci U, Scateni S, Tozzi AE, et al. The availability and the adherence to 
pediatric guidelines for the management of syncope in the emergency 
department. J Pediatr. 2014;165:967–72.e1.
 113. Sanders NA, Jetter TL, Brignole M, et al. Standardized care pathway versus conventional approach in the management of patients present-
ing with faint at the University of Utah. Pacing Clin Electrophysiol. 2013;36:152–62.
 114. Kenny RA, O’Shea D, Walker HF. Impact of a dedicated syncope and falls facility for older adults on emergency beds. Age Ageing. 2002;31:272–5.
 115. Croci F, Brignole M, Alboni P , et al. The application of a standardized strategy of evaluation in patients with syncope referred to three syncope units. Europace. 2002;4:351–5.
 116. Brignole M, Disertori M, Menozzi C, et al. Management of syncope referred urgently to general hospitals with and without syncope units. 
Europace. 2003;5:293–8.
 117. Brignole M, Ungar A, Bartoletti A, et al. Standardized-care pathway vs. usual management of syncope patients presenting as emergencies at 
general hospitals. Europace. 2006;8:644–50.
 118. Brignole M, Ungar A, Casagranda I, et al. Prospective multicentre sys-
tematic guideline-based management of patients referred to the syncope 
units of general hospitals. Europace. 2010;12:109–18.
 119. Ammirati F, Colaceci R, Cesario A, et al. Management of syncope: clinical and economic impact of a syncope unit. Europace. 2008;10:471–6.
 120. Costantino G, Sun BC, Barbic F, et al. Syncope clinical management in 
the emergency department: a consensus from the first international 
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on November 12, 2025

Shen et al
August 1, 2017 Circulation. 2017;136:e60–e122. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000499
 e102workshop on syncope risk stratification in the emergency department. 
Eur Heart J. 2016;37:1493–8.
 121. Morag RM, Murdock LF, Khan ZA, et al. Do patients with a negative emergency department evaluation for syncope require hospital admis-
sion? J Emerg Med. 2004;27:339–43.
 122. Shiyovich A, Munchak I, Zelingher J, et al. Admission for syncope: 
evaluation, cost and prognosis according to etiology. Isr Med Assoc J. 
2008;10:104–8.
 123. Schillinger M, Domanovits H, Müllner M, et al. Admission for syncope: evaluation, cost and prognosis. Wien Klin Wochenschr. 2000;112:835–41.
 124. Chiu DT, Shapiro NI, Sun BC, et al. Are echocardiography, telemetry, 
ambulatory electrocardiography monitoring, and cardiac enzymes in 
emergency department patients presenting with syncope useful tests? A 
preliminary investigation. J Emerg Med. 2014;47:113–8.
 125. Thiruganasambandamoorthy V, Ramaekers R, Rahman MO, et al. Prognostic value of cardiac biomarkers in the risk stratification of syn-
cope: a systematic review. Intern Emerg Med. 2015;10:1003–14.
 126. Pfister R, Diedrichs H, Larbig R, et al. NT-pro-BNP for differential diagnosis 
in patients with syncope. Int J Cardiol. 2009;133:51–4.
 127. Reed MJ, Mills NL, Weir CJ. Sensitive troponin assay predicts outcome in syncope. Emerg Med J. 2012;29:1001–3.
 128. Prandoni P , Lensing AWA, Prins MH, et al. Prevalence of pulmonary embolism among patients hospitalized for syncope. N Engl J Med. 2016;375:1524–31.
 129. Tanimoto K, Yukiiri K, Mizushige K, et al. Usefulness of brain natriuretic peptide as a marker for separating cardiac and noncardiac causes of syn-
cope. Am J Cardiol. 2004;93:228–30.
 130. Costantino G, Solbiati M, Pisano G, et al. NT-pro-BNP for differential di-
agnosis in patients with syncope. Int J Cardiol. 2009;137:298–9; author 
reply 9.
 131. Fedorowski A, Burri P , Juul-Moller S, et al. A dedicated investigation unit 
improves management of syncopal attacks (Syncope Study of Unselected 
Population in Malmo–SYSTEMA I). Europace. 2010;12:1322–8.
 132. Kapoor WN. Evaluation and outcome of patients with syncope. Medicine 
(Baltimore). 1990;69:160–75.
 133. Douglas PS, Garcia MJ, Haines DE, et al. ACCF/ASE/AHA/ASNC/HFSA/HRS/SCAI/SCCM/SCCT/SCMR 2011 appropriate use criteria for echocar -
diography. A report of the American College of Cardiology Foundation Appropriate Use Criteria Task Force, American Society of Echocardiography, American Heart Association, American Society of Nuclear Cardiology, Heart 
Failure Society of America, Heart Rhythm Society, Society for Cardiovascular 
Angiography and Interventions, Society of Critical Care Medicine, Society 
of Cardiovascular Computed Tomography, and Society for Cardiovascular 
Magnetic Resonance. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2011;57:1126–66.
 134. Probst MA, Kanzaria HK, Gbedemah M, et al. National trends in re-source utilization associated with ED visits for syncope. Am J Emerg Med. 
2015;33:998–1001.
 135. Sparrow PJ, Merchant N, Provost YL, et al. CT and MR imaging findings in patients with acquired heart disease at risk for sudden cardiac death. 
Radiographics. 2009;29:805–23.
 136. Sparrow P , Merchant N, Provost Y, et al. Cardiac MRI and CT features 
of inheritable and congenital conditions associated with sudden cardiac 
death. Eur Radiol. 2009;19:259–70.
 137. Hulten EA, Carbonaro S, Petrillo SP , et al. Prognostic value of cardiac computed tomography angiography: a systematic review and meta- analysis. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2011;57:1237–47.
 138. El Aidi H, Adams A, Moons KG.M, et al. Cardiac magnetic resonance 
imaging findings and the risk of cardiovascular events in patients with 
recent myocardial infarction or suspected or known coronary artery 
disease: a systematic review of prognostic studies. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2014;63:1031–45.
 139. Tandri H, Calkins H. MR and CT imaging of arrhythmogenic cardiomy-opathy. Card Electrophysiol Clin. 2011;3:269–80.
 140. Steckman DA, Schneider PM, Schuller JL, et al. Utility of cardiac magnetic resonance imaging to differentiate cardiac sarcoidosis from arrhythmo-
genic right ventricular cardiomyopathy. Am J Cardiol. 2012;110:575–9.
 141. Janardhanan R. Echocardiography in arrhythmogenic right ventricular 
dysplasia/cardiomyopathy: can the technology survive in the era of car -
diac magnetic resonance imaging? Cardiol J. 2015;22:355–6.
 142. Krumholz HM, Douglas PS, Goldman L, et al. Clinical utility of transtho-
racic two-dimensional and Doppler echocardiography. J Am Coll Cardiol. 
1994;24:125–31.
 143. Woelfel AK, Simpson RJ Jr, Gettes LS, et al. Exercise-induced distal atrio-
ventricular block. J Am Coll Cardiol. 1983;2:578–81. 144. Rozanski JJ, Castellanos A, Sheps D, et al. Paroxysmal second-degree 
atrioventricular block induced by exercise. Heart Lung. 1980;9:887–90.
 145. Oliveros RA, Seaworth J, Weiland FL, et al. Intermittent left anterior hemi-block during treadmill exercise test. Correlation with coronary arterio-
gram. Chest. 1977;72:492–4.
 146. Bobba P , Salerno JA, Casari A. Transient left posterior hemiblock. Report 
of four cases induced by exercise test. Circulation. 1972;46:931–8.
 147. Bharati S, Dhingra RC, Lev M, et al. Conduction system in a patient with Prinzmetal’s angina and transient atrioventricular block. Am J Cardiol. 
1977;39:120–5.
 148. Subbiah R, Chia PL, Gula LJ, et al. Cardiac monitoring in patients with syn-
cope: making that elusive diagnosis. Curr Cardiol Rev. 2013;9:299–307.
 149. Gibson TC, Heitzman MR. Diagnostic efficacy of 24-hour electrocardio-
graphic monitoring for syncope. Am J Cardiol. 1984;53:1013–7.
 150. Linzer M, Pritchett EL, Pontinen M, et al. Incremental diagnostic yield of loop electrocardiographic recorders in unexplained syncope. Am J 
Cardiol. 1990;66:214–9.
 151. Linzer M, Yang EH, Estes NA 3rd, et al. Diagnosing syncope. Part 2: un-
explained syncope. Clinical Efficacy Assessment Project of the American 
College of Physicians. Ann Intern Med. 1997;127:76–86.
 152. Reiffel JA, Schwarzberg R, Murry M. Comparison of autotriggered mem-ory loop recorders versus standard loop recorders versus 24-hour Holter 
monitors for arrhythmia detection. Am J Cardiol. 2005;95:1055–9.
 153. Sivakumaran S, Krahn AD, Klein GJ, et al. A prospective randomized 
comparison of loop recorders versus Holter monitors in patients with 
syncope or presyncope. Am J Med. 2003;115:1–5.
 154. Brown AP , Dawkins KD, Davies JG. Detection of arrhythmias: use of a patient-activated ambulatory electrocardiogram device with a solid-state memory loop. Br Heart J. 1987;58:251–3.
 155. Cumbee SR, Pryor RE, Linzer M. Cardiac loop ECG recording: a new nonin-vasive diagnostic test in recurrent syncope. South Med J. 1990;83:39–43.
 156. Locati ET, Moya A, Oliveira M, et al. External prolonged electrocardio-
gram monitoring in unexplained syncope and palpitations: results of the 
SYNARR-Flash study. Europace. 2016;18:1265–72.
 157. Barrett PM, Komatireddy R, Haaser S, et al. Comparison of 24-hour 
Holter monitoring with 14-day novel adhesive patch electrocardiographic 
monitoring. Am J Med. 2014;127:95–7.
 158. Rosenberg MA, Samuel M, Thosani A, et al. Use of a noninvasive con-tinuous monitoring device in the management of atrial fibrillation: a pilot study. Pacing Clin Electrophysiol. 2013;36:328–33.
 159. Turakhia MP , Hoang DD, Zimetbaum P , et al. Diagnostic utility of a novel leadless arrhythmia monitoring device. Am J Cardiol. 2013;112:  
520–4.
 160. Joshi AK, Kowey PR, Prystowsky EN, et al. First experience with a Mobile Cardiac Outpatient Telemetry (MCOT) system for the diagnosis and man-agement of cardiac arrhythmia. Am J Cardiol. 2005;95:878–81.
 161. Rothman SA, Laughlin JC, Seltzer J, et al. The diagnosis of cardiac ar -
rhythmias: a prospective multi-center randomized study comparing mo-
bile cardiac outpatient telemetry versus standard loop event monitoring. 
J Cardiovasc Electrophysiol. 2007;18:241–7.
 162. Krahn AD, Klein GJ, Yee R, et al. Randomized assessment of syncope 
trial: conventional diagnostic testing versus a prolonged monitoring 
strategy. Circulation. 2001;104:46–51.
 163. Krahn AD, Klein GJ, Yee R, et al. Cost implications of testing strategy in patients with syncope: randomized assessment of syncope trial. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2003;42:495–501.
 164. Farwell DJ, Freemantle N, Sulke N. The clinical impact of implantable loop recorders in patients with syncope. Eur Heart J. 2006;27:351–6.
 165. Da Costa A, Defaye P , Romeyer-Bouchard C, et al. Clinical impact of the implantable loop recorder in patients with isolated syncope, bundle branch block and negative workup: a randomized multicentre prospec-tive study. Arch Cardiovasc Dis. 2013;106:146–54.
 166. Krahn AD, Klein GJ, Norris C, et al. The etiology of syncope in patients 
with negative tilt table and electrophysiological testing. Circulation. 
1995;92:1819–24.
 167. Krahn AD, Klein GJ, Yee R, et al. Use of an extended monitoring strategy in patients with problematic syncope. Reveal Investigators. Circulation. 1999;99:406–10.
 168. Moya A, Brignole M, Menozzi C, et al. Mechanism of syncope in pa-tients with isolated syncope and in patients with tilt-positive syncope. 
Circulation. 2001;104:1261–7.
 169. Brignole M, Menozzi C, Moya A, et al. Mechanism of syncope in pa-
tients with bundle branch block and negative electrophysiological test. 
Circulation. 2001;104:2045–50.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on November 12, 2025

2017 ACC/AHA/HRS Syncope Guideline
Circulation. 2017;136:e60–e122. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000499 August 1, 2017
 e103
CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINES 170. Boersma L, Mont L, Sionis A, et al. Value of the implantable loop recorder 
for the management of patients with unexplained syncope. Europace. 
2004;6:70–6.
 171. Krahn AD, Klein GJ, Yee R, et al. Detection of asymptomatic arrhythmias in unexplained syncope. Am Heart J. 2004;148:326–32.
 172. Pierre B, Fauchier L, Breard G, et al. Implantable loop recorder for re-
current syncope: influence of cardiac conduction abnormalities showing 
up on resting electrocardiogram and of underlying cardiac disease on 
follow-up developments. Europace. 2008;10:477–81.
 173. Edvardsson N, Frykman V, van Mechelen R, et al. Use of an implantable loop recorder to increase the diagnostic yield in unexplained syncope: 
results from the PICTURE registry. Europace. 2011;13:262–9.
 174. Linker NJ, Voulgaraki D, Garutti C, et al. Early versus delayed implanta-tion of a loop recorder in patients with unexplained syncope—effects on care pathway and diagnostic yield. Int J Cardiol. 2013;170:146–51.
 175. Palmisano P , Accogli M, Zaccaria M, et al. Predictive factors for pace-
maker implantation in patients receiving an implantable loop recorder for 
syncope remained unexplained after an extensive cardiac and neurologi-
cal workup. Int J Cardiol. 2013;168:3450–7.
 176. Podoleanu C, DaCosta A, Defaye P , et al. Early use of an implantable loop recorder in syncope evaluation: a randomized study in the context 
of the French healthcare system (FRESH study). Arch Cardiovasc Dis. 
2014;107:546–52.
 177. Sulke N, Sugihara C, Hong P , et al. The benefit of a remotely monitored 
implantable loop recorder as a first line investigation in unexplained syn-
cope: the EaSyAS II trial. Europace. 2016;18:912–8.
 178. Solbiati M, Costantino G, Casazza G, et al. Implantable loop recorder ver -
sus conventional diagnostic workup for unexplained recurrent syncope. 
Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2016;4:CD011637
 179. Brignole M, Menozzi C, Maggi R, et al. The usage and diagnostic yield 
of the implantable loop-recorder in detection of the mechanism of syn-cope and in guiding effective antiarrhythmic therapy in older people. 
Europace. 2005;7:273–9.
 180. Krahn AD, Klein GJ, Fitzpatrick A, et al. Predicting the outcome of pa-
tients with unexplained syncope undergoing prolonged monitoring. Pacing Clin Electrophysiol. 2002;25:37–41.
 181. Lombardi F, Calosso E, Mascioli G, et al. Utility of implantable loop re-
corder (Reveal Plus) in the diagnosis of unexplained syncope. Europace. 
2005;7:19–24.
 182. Benezet-Mazuecos J, Ibanez B, Rubio JM, et al. Utility of in-hospital car -
diac remote telemetry in patients with unexplained syncope. Europace. 
2007;9:1196–201.
 183. Lipskis DJ, Dannehl KN, Silverman ME. Value of radiotelemetry in a com-munity hospital. Am J Cardiol. 1984;53:1284–7.
 184. Kapoor WN. Syncope. N Engl J Med. 2000;343:1856–62.
 185. Estrada CA, Rosman HS, Prasad NK, et al. Role of telemetry monitoring 
in the non-intensive care unit. Am J Cardiol. 1995;76:960–5.
 186. Sivaram CA, Summers JH, Ahmed N. Telemetry outside critical care units: patterns of utilization and influence on management decisions. Clin 
Cardiol. 1998;21:503–5.
 187. Ivonye C, Ohuabunwo C, Henriques-Forsythe M, et al. Evaluation of te-
lemetry utilization, policy, and outcomes in an inner-city academic medi-cal center. J Natl Med Assoc. 2010;102:598–604.
 188. Ungar A, Mussi C, Del Rosso A, et al. Diagnosis and characteristics of 
syncope in older patients referred to geriatric departments. J Am Geriatr 
Soc. 2006;54:1531–6.
 189. Fujimura O, Yee R, Klein GJ, et al. The diagnostic sensitivity of electro-
physiologic testing in patients with syncope caused by transient brady-cardia. N Engl J Med. 1989;321:1703–7.
 190. Scheinman MM, Peters RW, Suavé MJ, et al. Value of the H-Q interval in 
patients with bundle branch block and the role of prophylactic perma-
nent pacing. Am J Cardiol. 1982;50:1316–22.
 191. Blanc JJ. Clinical laboratory testing: what is the role of tilt-table testing, ac-tive standing test, carotid massage, electrophysiological testing and ATP 
test in the syncope evaluation? Prog Cardiovasc Dis. 2013;55:418–24.
 192. Link MS, Kim KM, Homoud MK, et al. Long-term outcome of patients 
with syncope associated with coronary artery disease and a nondiagnos-
tic electrophysiologic evaluation. Am J Cardiol. 1999;83:1334–7.
 193. Militianu A, Salacata A, Seibert K, et al. Implantable cardioverter defi-brillator utilization among device recipients presenting exclusively with 
syncope or near-syncope. J Cardiovasc Electrophysiol. 1997;8:1087–97.
 194. Pezawas T, Stix G, Kastner J, et al. Unexplained syncope in patients with 
structural heart disease and no documented ventricular arrhythmias: val-
ue of electrophysiologically guided implantable cardioverter defibrillator 
therapy. Europace. 2003;5:305–12. 195. Steinberg JS, Beckman K, Greene HL, et al. Follow-up of patients with unexplained syncope and inducible ventricular tachyarrhythmias: 
analysis of the AVID registry and an AVID substudy. Antiarrhythmics 
Versus Implantable Defibrillators. J Cardiovasc Electrophysiol. 
2001;12:996–1001.
 196. Andrews NP , Fogel RI, Pelargonio G, et al. Implantable defibrillator event 
rates in patients with unexplained syncope and inducible sustained ven-
tricular tachyarrhythmias: a comparison with patients known to have 
sustained ventricular tachycardia. J Am Coll Cardiol. 1999;34:2023–30.
 197. Bass EB, Elson JJ, Fogoros RN, et al. Long-term prognosis of patients un-dergoing electrophysiologic studies for syncope of unknown origin. Am 
J Cardiol. 1988;62:1186–91.
 198. Olshansky B, Mazuz M, Martins JB. Significance of inducible tachycardia in patients with syncope of unknown origin: a long-term follow-up. J Am Coll Cardiol. 1985;5:216–23.
 199. Denniss AR, Ross DL, Richards DA, et al. Electrophysiologic studies in 
patients with unexplained syncope. Int J Cardiol. 1992;35:211–7.
 200. Lacroix D, Dubuc M, Kus T, et al. Evaluation of arrhythmic causes of syn-cope: correlation between Holter monitoring, electrophysiologic testing, 
and body surface potential mapping. Am Heart J. 1991;122:1346–54.
 201. Sra JS, Anderson AJ, Sheikh SH, et al. Unexplained syncope evaluated 
by electrophysiologic studies and head-up tilt testing. Ann Intern Med. 
1991;114:1013–9.
 202. Click RL, Gersh BJ, Sugrue DD, et al. Role of invasive electrophysiologic 
testing in patients with symptomatic bundle branch block. Am J Cardiol. 
1987;59:817–23.
 203. Reiffel JA, Wang P , Bower R, et al. Electrophysiologic testing in patients with recurrent syncope: are results predicted by prior ambulatory moni-
toring? Am Heart J. 1985;110:1146–53.
 204. Morady F, Higgins J, Peters RW, et al. Electrophysiologic testing 
in bundle branch block and unexplained syncope. Am J Cardiol. 1984;54:587–91.
 205. Gulamhusein S, Naccarelli GV, Ko PT, et al. Value and limitations of clini-
cal electrophysiologic study in assessment of patients with unexplained 
syncope. Am J Med. 1982;73:700–5.
 206. Sagristà-Sauleda J, Romero-Ferrer B, Moya A, et al. Variations in diagnos-
tic yield of head-up tilt test and electrophysiology in groups of patients with syncope of unknown origin. Eur Heart J. 2001;22:857–65.
 207. Gatzoulis KA, Karystinos G, Gialernios T, et al. Correlation of nonin-vasive electrocardiography with invasive electrophysiology in syncope 
of unknown origin: implications from a large syncope database. Ann 
Noninvasive Electrocardiol. 2009;14:119–27.
 208. Kenny RA, Ingram A, Bayliss J, et al. Head-up tilt: a useful test for inves-tigating unexplained syncope. Lancet. 1986;1:1352–5.
 209. Fitzpatrick A, Theodorakis G, Vardas P , et al. The incidence of malig-nant vasovagal syndrome in patients with recurrent syncope. Eur Heart J. 
1991;12:389–94.
 210. Almquist A, Goldenberg IF, Milstein S, et al. Provocation of bradycardia and hypotension by isoproterenol and upright posture in patients with 
unexplained syncope. N Engl J Med. 1989;320:346–51.
 211. Grubb BP , Kosinski D. Tilt table testing: concepts and limitations. Pacing 
Clin Electrophysiol. 1997;20:781–7.
 212. Morillo CA, Klein GJ, Zandri S, et al. Diagnostic accuracy of a low-dose 
isoproterenol head-up tilt protocol. Am Heart J. 1995;129:901–6.
 213. Natale A, Akhtar M, Jazayeri M, et al. Provocation of hypotension during 
head-up tilt testing in subjects with no history of syncope or presyncope. Circulation. 1995;92:54–8.
 214. Brignole M, Menozzi C, Del Rosso A, et al. New classification of hae-
modynamics of vasovagal syncope: beyond the VASIS classification. 
Analysis of the pre-syncopal phase of the tilt test without and with ni-troglycerin challenge. Vasovagal Syncope International Study. Europace. 
2000;2:66–76.
 215. Benditt DG, Ferguson DW, Grubb BP , et al. Tilt table testing for as-sessing syncope. American College of Cardiology. J Am Coll Cardiol. 
1996;28:263–75.
 216. Gisolf J, Westerhof BE, van DN, et al. Sublingual nitroglycerin used in rou-
tine tilt testing provokes a cardiac output-mediated vasovagal response. J 
Am Coll Cardiol. 2004;44:588–93.
 217. Raviele A, Menozzi C, Brignole M, et al. Value of head-up tilt testing po-tentiated with sublingual nitroglycerin to assess the origin of unexplained 
syncope. Am J Cardiol. 1995;76:267–72.
 218. Gibbons CH, Freeman R. Delayed orthostatic hypotension: a frequent 
cause of orthostatic intolerance. Neurology. 2006;67:28–32.
 219. Gibbons CH, Freeman R. Clinical implications of delayed orthostatic hy-potension: a 10-year follow-up study. Neurology. 2015;85:1362–7.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on November 12, 2025

Shen et al
August 1, 2017 Circulation. 2017;136:e60–e122. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000499
 e104 220. The definition of orthostatic hypotension, pure autonomic failure, and 
multiple system atrophy. J Auton Nerv Syst. 1996;58:123–4.
 221. Streeten DH, Anderson GH Jr, Delayed orthostatic intolerance. Arch Intern Med. 1992;152:1066–72.
 222. Passman R, Horvath G, Thomas J, et al. Clinical spectrum and prevalence of neurologic events provoked by tilt table testing. Arch Intern Med. 2003;163:1945–8.
 223. Grubb BP , Gerard G, Roush K, et al. Differentiation of convulsive syncope and epilepsy with head-up tilt testing. Ann Intern Med. 1991;115:871–6.
 224. Song PS, Kim JS, Park J, et al. Seizure-like activities during head-up tilt test-induced syncope. Yonsei Med J. 2010;51:77–81.
 225. Zaidi A, Clough P , Cooper P , et al. Misdiagnosis of epilepsy: many 
seizure-like attacks have a cardiovascular cause. J Am Coll Cardiol. 
2000;36:181–4.
 226. Sheldon R. How to differentiate syncope from seizure. Cardiol Clin. 2015;33:377–85.
 227. Zaidi A, Crampton S, Clough P , et al. Head-up tilting is a useful pro-
vocative test for psychogenic non-epileptic seizures. Seizure. 1999;8:  
353–5.
 228. Luzza F, Pugliatti P , di Rosa S, et al. Tilt-induced pseudosyncope. Int J Clin Pract. 2003;57:373–5.
 229. Tannemaat MR, van Niekerk J, Reijntjes RH, et al. The semiology of tilt-induced psychogenic pseudosyncope. Neurology. 2013;81:752–8.
 230. Moya A, Permanyer-Miralda G, Sagrista-Sauleda J, et al. Limitations of 
head-up tilt test for evaluating the efficacy of therapeutic interventions in 
patients with vasovagal syncope: results of a controlled study of etilefrine 
versus placebo. J Am Coll Cardiol. 1995;25:65–9.
 231. Morillo CA, Leitch JW, Yee R, et al. A placebo-controlled trial of intrave-
nous and oral disopyramide for prevention of neurally mediated syncope 
induced by head-up tilt. J Am Coll Cardiol. 1993;22:1843–8.
 232. Milstein S, Buetikofer J, Dunnigan A, et al. Usefulness of disopyramide 
for prevention of upright tilt-induced hypotension-bradycardia. Am J 
Cardiol. 1990;65:1339–44.
 233. Raviele A, Gasparini G, Di PF, et al. Usefulness of head-up tilt test in 
evaluating patients with syncope of unknown origin and negative elec-
trophysiologic study. Am J Cardiol. 1990;65:1322–7.
 234. Grubb BP , Wolfe DA, Samoil D, et al. Usefulness of fluoxetine hydrochlo-ride for prevention of resistant upright tilt induced syncope. Pacing Clin 
Electrophysiol. 1993;16:458–64.
 235. Sra JS, Murthy VS, Jazayeri MR, et al. Use of intravenous esmolol to pre-
dict efficacy of oral beta-adrenergic blocker therapy in patients with neu-
rocardiogenic syncope. J Am Coll Cardiol. 1992;19:402–8.
 236. Low PA, Benrud-Larson LM, Sletten DM, et al. Autonomic symptoms and diabetic neuropathy: a population-based study. Diabetes Care. 2004;27:2942–7.
 237. Kim DH, Zeldenrust SR, Low PA, et al. Quantitative sensation and au-
tonomic test abnormalities in transthyretin amyloidosis polyneuropathy. 
Muscle Nerve. 2009;40:363–70.
 238. Thaisetthawatkul P , Boeve BF, Benarroch EE, et al. Autonomic dysfunction in dementia with Lewy bodies. Neurology. 2004;62:1804–9.
 239. Iodice V, Lipp A, Ahlskog JE, et al. Autopsy confirmed multiple system 
atrophy cases: Mayo experience and role of autonomic function tests. J 
Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatr. 2012;83:453–9.
 240. Freeman R. Autonomic peripheral neuropathy. Lancet. 2005;365:  
1259–70.
 241. Fanciulli A, Wenning GK. Multiple-system atrophy. N Engl J Med. 
2015;372:1375–6.
 242. Cersosimo MG, Benarroch EE. Autonomic involvement in Parkinson’s  
disease: pathology, pathophysiology, clinical features and possible peripheral  
biomarkers. J Neurol Sci. 2012;313:57–63.
 243. Garland EM, Hooper WB, Robertson D. Pure autonomic failure. Handb 
Clin Neurol. 2013;117:243–57.
 244. Cersosimo MG, Benarroch EE. Central control of autonomic function 
and involvement in neurodegenerative disorders. Handb Clin Neurol. 
2013;117:45–57.
 245. Fanciulli A, Strano S, Colosimo C, et al. The potential prognostic role of cardiovascular autonomic failure in alpha-synucleinopathies. Eur J Neurol. 2013;20:231–5.
 246. Figueroa JJ, Singer W, Parsaik A, et al. Multiple system atrophy: prognos-tic indicators of survival. Mov Disord. 2014;29:1151–7.
 247. Benarroch EE. The clinical approach to autonomic failure in neurological disorders. Nat Rev Neurol. 2014;10:396–407.
 248. Low PA, Tomalia VA, Park KJ. Autonomic function tests: some clinical 
applications. J Clin Neurol. 2013;9:1–8. 249. Jansen RW, Lipsitz LA. Postprandial hypotension: epidemiology, patho-
physiology, and clinical management. Ann Intern Med. 1995;122:286–95.
 250. Gibbons CH, Bonyhay I, Benson A, et al. Structural and functional small fiber abnormalities in the neuropathic postural tachycardia syndrome. 
PLoS ONE. 2013;8:e84716
 251. Al-Nsoor NM, Mhearat AS. Brain computed tomography in patients with 
syncope. Neurosciences (Riyadh). 2010;15:105–9.
 252. Giglio P , Bednarczyk EM, Weiss K, et al. Syncope and head CT scans in the emergency department. Emerg Radiol. 2005;12:44–6.
 253. Goyal N, Donnino MW, Vachhani R, et al. The utility of head computed tomography in the emergency department evaluation of syncope. Intern Emerg Med. 2006;1:148–50.
 254. Abubakr A, Wambacq I. The diagnostic value of EEGs in patients with 
syncope. Epilepsy Behav. 2005;6:433–4.
 255. Poliquin-Lasnier L, Moore FGA. EEG in suspected syncope: do EEGs ordered by neurologists give a higher yield? Can J Neurol Sci. 2009;36:769–73.
 256. Kang GH, Oh JH, Kim JS, et al. Diagnostic patterns in the evaluation of 
patients presenting with syncope at the emergency or outpatient depart-ment. Yonsei Med J. 2012;53:517–23.
 257. Pires LA, Ganji JR, Jarandila R, et al. Diagnostic patterns and temporal trends in the evaluation of adult patients hospitalized with syncope. Arch 
Intern Med. 2001;161:1889–95.
 258. Mecarelli O, Pulitano P , Vicenzini E, et al. Observations on EEG patterns 
in neurally-mediated syncope: an inspective and quantitative study. 
Neurophysiol Clin. 2004;34:203–7.
 259. Mitsunaga MM, Yoon HC. Journal Club: Head CT scans in the emer -
gency department for syncope and dizziness. AJR Am J Roentgenol. 
2015;204:24–8.
 260. Sclafani JJ, My J, Zacher LL, et al. Intensive education on evidence-based 
evaluation of syncope increases sudden death risk stratification but fails 
to reduce use of neuroimaging. Arch Intern Med. 2010;170:1150–4.
 261. Ammirati F, Colivicchi F, Di Battista G, et al. Electroencephalographic 
correlates of vasovagal syncope induced by head-up tilt testing. Stroke. 
1998;29:2347–51.
 262. Sheldon RS, Koshman ML, Murphy WF. Electroencephalographic find-
ings during presyncope and syncope induced by tilt table testing. Can J 
Cardiol. 1998;14:811–6.
 263. van Dijk JG, Thijs RD, van Zwet E, et al. The semiology of tilt-induced reflex syncope in relation to electroencephalographic changes. Brain. 2014;137:576–85.
 264. Deleted in press.
 265. Santini M, Castro A, Giada F, et al. Prevention of syncope through per -
manent cardiac pacing in patients with bifascicular block and syncope of unexplained origin: the PRESS study. Circ Arrhythm Electrophysiol. 2013;6:101–7.
 266. Flammang D, Church TR, De Roy L, et al. Treatment of unexplained syn-
cope: a multicenter, randomized trial of cardiac pacing guided by ad-
enosine 5’-triphosphate testing. Circulation. 2012;125:31–6.
 267. Kalusche D, Ott P , Arentz T, et al. AV nodal re-entry tachycardia in elder -
ly patients: clinical presentation and results of radiofrequency catheter ablation therapy. Coron Artery Dis. 1998;9:359–63.
 268.  Haghjoo M, Arya A, Heidari A, et al. Electrophysiologic characteristics and results of radiofrequency catheter ablation in elderly patients with atrioven-
tricular nodal reentrant tachycardia. J Electrocardiol. 2007;40:208–13.
 269. Auricchio A, Klein H, Trappe HJ, et al. Lack of prognostic value of synco-
pe in patients with Wolff-Parkinson-White syndrome. J Am Coll Cardiol. 
1991;17:152–8.
 270. Brignole M, Gianfranchi L, Menozzi C, et al. Role of autonomic reflexes in syncope associated with paroxysmal atrial fibrillation. J Am Coll Cardiol. 
1993;22:1123–9.
 271. Russo AM, Stainback RF, Bailey SR, et al. ACCF/HRS/AHA/ASE/HFSA/SCAI/SCCT/SCMR 2013 appropriate use criteria for implantable car -
dioverter-defibrillators and cardiac resynchronization therapy: a re-
port of the American College of Cardiology Foundation Appropriate 
Use Criteria Task Force, Heart Rhythm Society, American Heart 
Association, American Society of Echocardiography, Heart Failure 
Society of America, Society for Cardiovascular Angiography and Interventions, Society of Cardiovascular Computed Tomography, and 
Society for Cardiovascular Magnetic Resonance. J Am Coll Cardiol. 
2013;61:1318–68.
 272. Huikuri HV, Zaman L, Castellanos A, et al. Changes in spontaneous sinus node rate as an estimate of cardiac autonomic tone during sta-ble and unstable ventricular tachycardia. J Am Coll Cardiol. 1989;13: 
646–52.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on November 12, 2025

2017 ACC/AHA/HRS Syncope Guideline
Circulation. 2017;136:e60–e122. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000499 August 1, 2017
 e105
CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINES 273. Morady F, Shen EN, Bhandari A, et al. Clinical symptoms in patients with 
sustained ventricular tachycardia. West J Med. 1985;142:341–4.
 274. Bhonsale A, James CA, Tichnell C, et al. Incidence and predictors of im-plantable cardioverter-defibrillator therapy in patients with arrhythmo-
genic right ventricular dysplasia/cardiomyopathy undergoing implantable 
cardioverter-defibrillator implantation for primary prevention. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2011;58:1485–96.
 275. Bhonsale A, James CA, Tichnell C, et al. Risk stratification in arrhythmo-genic right ventricular dysplasia/cardiomyopathy-associated desmosomal 
mutation carriers. Circ Arrhythm Electrophysiol. 2013;6:569–78.
 276. Corrado D, Leoni L, Link MS, et al. Implantable cardioverter-defi-
brillator therapy for prevention of sudden death in patients with ar -
rhythmogenic right ventricular cardiomyopathy/dysplasia. Circulation. 
2003;108:3084–91.
 277. Corrado D, Wichter T, Link MS, et al. Treatment of arrhythmogenic right ventricular cardiomyopathy/dysplasia: an international task force consen-
sus statement. Circulation. 2015;132:441–53.
 278. Link MS, Laidlaw D, Polonsky B, et al. Ventricular arrhythmias in the 
North American multidisciplinary study of ARVC: predictors, character -
istics, and treatment. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2014;64:119–25.
 279. Corrado D, Calkins H, Link MS, et al. Prophylactic implantable defibril-
lator in patients with arrhythmogenic right ventricular cardiomyopathy/
dysplasia and no prior ventricular fibrillation or sustained ventricular tachycardia. Circulation. 2010;122:1144–52.
 280. Koplan BA, Soejima K, Baughman K, et al. Refractory ventricular tachy-cardia secondary to cardiac sarcoid: electrophysiologic characteristics, 
mapping, and ablation. Heart Rhythm. 2006;3:924–9.
 281. Jefic D, Joel B, Good E, et al. Role of radiofrequency catheter ablation of 
ventricular tachycardia in cardiac sarcoidosis: report from a multicenter 
registry. Heart Rhythm. 2009;6:189–95.
 282. Berte B, Eyskens B, Meyfroidt G, et al. Bidirectional ventricular tachycar -
dia in fulminant myocarditis. Europace. 2008;10:767–8.
 283. Winters SL, Cohen M, Greenberg S, et al. Sustained ventricular tachy-
cardia associated with sarcoidosis: assessment of the underlying cardiac anatomy and the prospective utility of programmed ventricular stimula-
tion, drug therapy and an implantable antitachycardia device. J Am Coll 
Cardiol. 1991;18:937–43.
 284. Furushima H, Chinushi M, Sugiura H, et al. Ventricular tachyarrhythmia associated with cardiac sarcoidosis: its mechanisms and outcome. Clin Cardiol. 2004;27:217–22.
 285. Hiramitsu S, Morimoto S, Uemura A, et al. National survey on status of steroid therapy for cardiac sarcoidosis in Japan. Sarcoidosis Vasc Diffuse 
Lung Dis. 2005;22:210–3.
 286. Birnie DH, Sauer WH, Bogun F, et al. HRS expert consensus statement 
on the diagnosis and management of arrhythmias associated with cardiac sarcoidosis. Heart Rhythm. 2014;11:1305–23.
 287. Kandolin R, Lehtonen J, Kupari M. Cardiac sarcoidosis and giant cell myocarditis as causes of atrioventricular block in young and middle-aged 
adults. Circ Arrhythm Electrophysiol. 2011;4:303–9.
 288. Chapelon-Abric C, de Zuttere D, Duhaut P , et al. Cardiac sarcoidosis: a 
retrospective study of 41 cases. Medicine (Baltimore). 2004;83:315–34.
 289. Yodogawa K, Seino Y, Ohara T, et al. Effect of corticosteroid therapy on ventricular arrhythmias in patients with cardiac sarcoidosis. Ann 
Noninvasive Electrocardiol. 2011;16:140–7.
 290. Schuller JL, Zipse M, Crawford T, et al. Implantable cardioverter de-
fibrillator therapy in patients with cardiac sarcoidosis. J Cardiovasc 
Electrophysiol. 2012;23:925–9.
 291. Betensky BP , Tschabrunn CM, Zado ES, et al. Long-term follow-up of pa-tients with cardiac sarcoidosis and implantable cardioverter-defibrillators. 
Heart Rhythm. 2012;9:884–91.
 292. Kron J, Sauer W, Schuller J, et al. Efficacy and safety of implantable cardi-ac defibrillators for treatment of ventricular arrhythmias in patients with cardiac sarcoidosis. Europace. 2013;15:347–54.
 293. Namboodiri N, Stiles MK, Young GD, et al. Electrophysiological features of atrial flutter in cardiac sarcoidosis: a report of two cases. Indian Pacing 
Electrophysiol J. 2012;12:284–9.
 294. Mehta D, Mori N, Goldbarg SH, et al. Primary prevention of sudden car -
diac death in silent cardiac sarcoidosis: role of programmed ventricular stimulation. Circ Arrhythm Electrophysiol. 2011;4:43–8.
 295. Antzelevitch C, Brugada P , Borggrefe M, et al. Brugada syndrome: report of the second consensus conference. Heart Rhythm. 2005;2:429–40.
 296. Gehi AK, Duong TD, Metz LD, et al. Risk stratification of individu-
als with the Brugada electrocardiogram: a meta-analysis. J Cardiovasc 
Electrophysiol. 2006;17:577–83. 297. Probst V, Veltmann C, Eckardt L, et al. Long-term prognosis of patients 
diagnosed with Brugada syndrome: results from the FINGER Brugada 
Syndrome Registry. Circulation. 2010;121:635–43.
 298. Sacher F, Arsac F, Wilton SB, et al. Syncope in Brugada syndrome  
patients: prevalence, characteristics, and outcome. Heart Rhythm. 
2012;9:1272–9.
 299. Hiraoka M, Takagi M, Yokoyama Y, et al. Prognosis and risk strati-
fication of young adults with Brugada syndrome. J Electrocardiol. 
2013;46:279–83.
 300. Sacher F, Probst V, Iesaka Y, et al. Outcome after implantation of a car -
dioverter-defibrillator in patients with Brugada syndrome: a multicenter study. Circulation. 2006;114:2317–24.
 301. Priori SG, Gasparini M, Napolitano C, et al. Risk stratification in Brugada 
syndrome: results of the PRELUDE (PRogrammed ELectrical stimUlation 
preDictive valuE) registry. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2012;59:37–45.
 302. Morita H, Kusano KF, Miura D, et al. Fragmented QRS as a marker of con-
duction abnormality and a predictor of prognosis of Brugada syndrome. 
Circulation. 2008;118:1697–704.
 303. Sarkozy A, Boussy T, Kourgiannides G, et al. Long-term follow-up of 
primary prophylactic implantable cardioverter-defibrillator therapy in 
Brugada syndrome. Eur Heart J. 2007;28:334–44.
 304. Rosso R, Glick A, Glikson M, et al. Outcome after implantation of car -
dioverter defibrillator [corrected] in patients with Brugada syndrome: a multicenter Israeli study (ISRABRU). Isr Med Assoc J. 2008;10:435–9.
 305. Gaita F, Giustetto C, Bianchi F, et al. Short QT syndrome: a familial cause of sudden death. Circulation. 2003;108:965–70.
 306. Giustetto C, Schimpf R, Mazzanti A, et al. Long-term follow-up of pa-tients with short QT syndrome. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2011;58:587–95.
 307. Brugada R, Hong K, Dumaine R, et al. Sudden death associated with short-
QT syndrome linked to mutations in HERG. Circulation. 2004;109:30–5.
 308. Gollob MH, Redpath CJ, Roberts JD. The short QT syndrome: proposed 
diagnostic criteria. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2011;57:802–12.
 309. Anttonen O, Junttila MJ, Rissanen H, et al. Prevalence and prognostic significance of short QT interval in a middle-aged Finnish population. Circulation. 2007;116:714–20.
 310. Funada A, Hayashi K, Ino H, et al. Assessment of QT intervals and preva-lence of short QT syndrome in Japan. Clin Cardiol. 2008;31:270–4.
 311. Kobza R, Roos M, Niggli B, et al. Prevalence of long and short QT in a young population of 41,767 predominantly male Swiss conscripts. Heart Rhythm. 2009;6:652–7.
 312. Gallagher MM, Magliano G, Yap YG, et al. Distribution and prognostic significance of QT intervals in the lowest half centile in 12,012 apparently 
healthy persons. Am J Cardiol. 2006;98:933–5.
 313. Hermosillo AG, Falcón JC, Márquez MF, et al. Positive head-up tilt table 
test in patients with the long QT syndrome. Europace. 1999;1:213–7.
 314. Toft E, Aarøe J, Jensen BT, et al. Long QT syndrome patients may faint 
due to neurocardiogenic syncope. Europace. 2003;5:367–70.
 315. Colman N, Bakker A, Linzer M, et al. Value of history-taking in syn-cope patients: in whom to suspect long QT syndrome? Europace. 
2009;11:937–43.
 316. Priori SG, Napolitano C, Schwartz PJ, et al. Association of long QT syn-
drome loci and cardiac events among patients treated with beta-block-
ers. JAMA. 2004;292:1341–4.
 317. Vincent GM, Schwartz PJ, Denjoy I, et al. High efficacy of beta-blockers 
in long-QT syndrome type 1: contribution of noncompliance and QT-prolonging drugs to the occurrence of beta-blocker treatment “failures”. 
Circulation. 2009;119:215–21.
 318. Liu JF, Jons C, Moss AJ, et al. Risk factors for recurrent syncope and sub-sequent fatal or near-fatal events in children and adolescents with long 
QT syndrome. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2011;57:941–50.
 319. Chockalingam P , Crotti L, Girardengo G, et al. Not all beta-blockers are equal in the management of long QT syndrome types 1 and 2: higher re-currence of events under metoprolol. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2012;60:2092–9.
 320. Abu-Zeitone A, Peterson DR, Polonsky B, et al. Efficacy of different be-ta-blockers in the treatment of long QT syndrome. J Am Coll Cardiol. 
2014;64:1352–8.
 321. Schwartz PJ, Spazzolini C, Priori SG, et al. Who are the long-QT syn-
drome patients who receive an implantable cardioverter- defibrillator and 
what happens to them?: Data from the European Long-QT Syndrome Implantable Cardioverter-Defibrillator (LQTS ICD) Registry. Circulation. 
2010;122:1272–82.
 322. Horner JM, Kinoshita M, Webster TL, et al. Implantable cardioverter defi-
brillator therapy for congenital long QT syndrome: a single-center experi-
ence. Heart Rhythm. 2010;7:1616–22.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on November 12, 2025

Shen et al
August 1, 2017 Circulation. 2017;136:e60–e122. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000499
 e106 323. Jons C, Moss AJ, Goldenberg I, et al. Risk of fatal arrhythmic events in long 
QT syndrome patients after syncope. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2010;55:783–8.
 324. Zareba W, Moss AJ, Daubert JP , et al. Implantable cardioverter defibrilla-tor in high-risk long QT syndrome patients. J Cardiovasc Electrophysiol. 
2003;14:337–41.
 325. Ouriel K, Moss AJ. Long QT syndrome: an indication for cervicothoracic 
sympathectomy. Cardiovasc Surg. 1995;3:475–8.
 326. Schwartz PJ, Priori SG, Cerrone M, et al. Left cardiac sympathetic dener -
vation in the management of high-risk patients affected by the long-QT 
syndrome. Circulation. 2004;109:1826–33.
 327. Collura CA, Johnson JN, Moir C, et al. Left cardiac sympathetic denerva-
tion for the treatment of long QT syndrome and catecholaminergic poly-
morphic ventricular tachycardia using video-assisted thoracic surgery. 
Heart Rhythm. 2009;6:752–9.
 328. Leenhardt A, Lucet V, Denjoy I, et al. Catecholaminergic polymorphic ventricular tachycardia in children. A 7-year follow-up of 21 patients. 
Circulation. 1995;91:1512–9.
 329. Sumitomo N, Harada K, Nagashima M, et al. Catecholaminergic poly-
morphic ventricular tachycardia: electrocardiographic characteristics 
and optimal therapeutic strategies to prevent sudden death. Heart. 
2003;89:66–70.
 330. Priori SG, Napolitano C, Tiso N, et al. Mutations in the cardiac ryanodine receptor gene (hRyR2) underlie catecholaminergic polymorphic ventricu-lar tachycardia. Circulation. 2001;103:196–200.
 331. Laitinen PJ, Brown KM, Piippo K, et al. Mutations of the cardiac ryano-dine receptor (RyR2) gene in familial polymorphic ventricular tachycardia. 
Circulation. 2001;103:485–90.
 332. Lahat H, Pras E, Olender T, et al. A missense mutation in a highly con-
served region of CASQ2 is associated with autosomal recessive catechol-
amine-induced polymorphic ventricular tachycardia in Bedouin families 
from Israel. Am J Hum Genet. 2001;69:1378–84.
 333. Lahat H, Eldar M, Levy-Nissenbaum E, et al. Autosomal recessive cat-
echolamine- or exercise-induced polymorphic ventricular tachycardia: 
clinical features and assignment of the disease gene to chromosome 1p13-21. Circulation. 2001;103:2822–7.
 334. Hayashi M, Denjoy I, Extramiana F, et al. Incidence and risk factors of arrhythmic events in catecholaminergic polymorphic ventricular tachy-
cardia. Circulation. 2009;119:2426–34.
 335. Ackerman MJ, Zipes DP , Kovacs RJ, et al. Eligibility and disqualification 
recommendations for competitive athletes with cardiovascular abnor -
malities: Task Force 10: the cardiac channelopathies: a scientific state-ment from the American Heart Association and American College of 
Cardiology. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2015;66:2424–8.
 336. Priori SG, Napolitano C, Memmi M, et al. Clinical and molecular char -
acterization of patients with catecholaminergic polymorphic ventricular 
tachycardia. Circulation. 2002;106:69–74.
 337. Roston TM, Vinocur JM, Maginot KR, et al. Catecholaminergic polymor -
phic ventricular tachycardia in children: analysis of therapeutic strategies 
and outcomes from an international multicenter registry. Circ Arrhythm 
Electrophysiol. 2015;8:633–42.
 338. van der Werf C, Zwinderman AH, Wilde AA.M. Therapeutic approach 
for patients with catecholaminergic polymorphic ventricular tachycardia: 
state of the art and future developments. Europace. 2012;14:175–83.
 339. Sy RW, Gollob MH, Klein GJ, et al. Arrhythmia characterization and long-term outcomes in catecholaminergic polymorphic ventricular tachycar -
dia. Heart Rhythm. 2011;8:864–71.
 340. van der Werf C, Kannankeril PJ, Sacher F, et al. Flecainide therapy re-duces exercise-induced ventricular arrhythmias in patients with cat-
echolaminergic polymorphic ventricular tachycardia. J Am Coll Cardiol. 
2011;57:2244–54.
 341. Padfield GJ, AlAhmari L, Lieve KV, et al. Flecainide monotherapy is an option for selected patients with catecholaminergic polymorphic ven-tricular tachycardia intolerant of beta-blockade. Heart Rhythm. 2016;13: 
609–13.
 342. Moray A, Kirk EP , Grant P , et al. Prophylactic left thoracic sympathectomy to prevent electrical storms in CPVT patients needing ICD placement. 
Heart Lung Circ. 2011;20:731–3.
 343. Celiker A, Erdoğan I, Karagöz T, et al. Clinical experiences of patients 
with catecholaminergic polymorphic ventricular tachycardia. Cardiol 
Young. 2009;19:45–52.
 344. Marai I, Khoury A, Suleiman M, et al. Importance of ventricular tachy-cardia storms not terminated by implantable cardioverter defibrillators shocks in patients with CASQ2 associated catecholaminergic polymor -
phic ventricular tachycardia. Am J Cardiol. 2012;110:72–6. 345. Roses-Noguer F, Jarman JW.E, Clague JR, et al. Outcomes of defibrillator therapy in catecholaminergic polymorphic ventricular tachycardia. Heart 
Rhythm. 2014;11:58–66.
 346. Swan H, Laitinen P , Kontula K, et al. Calcium channel antagonism re-duces exercise-induced ventricular arrhythmias in catecholaminergic 
polymorphic ventricular tachycardia patients with RyR2 mutations. J Cardiovasc Electrophysiol. 2005;16:162–6.
 347. Rosso R, Kalman JM, Rogowski O, et al. Calcium channel blockers and beta-blockers versus beta-blockers alone for preventing exercise-induced 
arrhythmias in catecholaminergic polymorphic ventricular tachycardia. 
Heart Rhythm. 2007;4:1149–54.
 348. Wilde AA.M, Bhuiyan ZA, Crotti L, et al. Left cardiac sympathetic dener -
vation for catecholaminergic polymorphic ventricular tachycardia. N Engl 
J Med. 2008;358:2024–9.
 349. De Ferrari GM, Dusi V, Spazzolini C, et al. Clinical management of cat-echolaminergic polymorphic ventricular tachycardia: the role of left 
 cardiac sympathetic denervation. Circulation. 2015;131:2185–93.
 350. Waddell-Smith KE, Ertresvaag KN, Li J, et al. Physical and psychological 
consequences of left cardiac sympathetic denervation for long-QT syn-
drome and catecholaminergic polymorphic ventricular tachycardia. Circ 
Arrhythm Electrophysiol 2015
 351. Junttila MJ, Sager SJ, Freiser M, et al. Inferolateral early repolarization in athletes. J Interv Card Electrophysiol. 2011;31:33–8.
 352. Haïssaguerre M, Derval N, Sacher F, et al. Sudden cardiac arrest associ-
ated with early repolarization. N Engl J Med. 2008;358:2016–23.
 353. Rosso R, Kogan E, Belhassen B, et al. J-point elevation in survivors of primary ventricular fibrillation and matched control subjects: incidence 
and clinical significance. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2008;52:1231–8.
 354. Derval N, Simpson CS, Birnie DH, et al. Prevalence and characteristics of 
early repolarization in the CASPER registry: cardiac arrest survivors with 
preserved ejection fraction registry. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2011;58:722–8.
 355. Abe A, Ikeda T, Tsukada T, et al. Circadian variation of late potentials 
in idiopathic ventricular fibrillation associated with J waves: insights 
into alternative pathophysiology and risk stratification. Heart Rhythm. 2010;7:675–82.
 356. Merchant FM, Noseworthy PA, Weiner RB, et al. Ability of terminal QRS notching to distinguish benign from malignant electrocardiographic 
forms of early repolarization. Am J Cardiol. 2009;104:1402–6.
 357. Sinner MF, Reinhard W, Müller M, et al. Association of early repolar -
ization pattern on ECG with risk of cardiac and all-cause mortality: a population-based prospective cohort study (MONICA/KORA). PLoS Med. 
2010;7:e1000314
 358. Nunn LM, Bhar-Amato J, Lowe MD, et al. Prevalence of J-point eleva-tion in sudden arrhythmic death syndrome families. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2011;58:286–90.
 359. Mahida S, Derval N, Sacher F, et al. Role of electrophysiological studies in 
predicting risk of ventricular arrhythmia in early repolarization syndrome. 
J Am Coll Cardiol. 2015;65:151–9.
 360. Morady F, DiCarlo LA Jr, Baerman JM, et al. Comparison of cou-pling intervals that induce clinical and nonclinical forms of ven-tricular tachycardia during programmed stimulation. Am J Cardiol. 
1986;57:1269–73.
 361. Mosqueda-Garcia R, Furlan R, Tank J, et al. The elusive pathophysiology of neurally mediated syncope. Circulation. 2000;102:2898–906.
 362. Glick G, Yu PN. Hemodynamic changes during spontaneous vasovagal 
reactions. Am J Med. 1963;34:42–51.
 363. Hargreaves AD, Muir AL. Lack of variation in venous tone potentiates vasovagal syncope. Br Heart J. 1992;67:486–90.
 364. Manyari DE, Rose S, Tyberg JV, et al. Abnormal reflex venous func-tion in patients with neuromediated syncope. J Am Coll Cardiol. 1996;27:1730–5.
 365. Thomson HL, Atherton JJ, Khafagi FA, et al. Failure of reflex venocon-striction during exercise in patients with vasovagal syncope. Circulation. 
1996;93:953–9.
 366. Rose MS, Koshman ML, Spreng S, et al. The relationship between health-related quality of life and frequency of spells in patients with syncope. J 
Clin Epidemiol. 2000;53:1209–16.
 367. Ganzeboom KS, Colman N, Reitsma JB, et al. Prevalence and triggers of 
syncope in medical students. Am J Cardiol. 2003;91:1006–8.A8
 368. Serletis A, Rose S, Sheldon AG, et al. Vasovagal syncope in medical stu-dents and their first-degree relatives. Eur Heart J. 2006;27:1965–70.
 369. Romme JJ, Reitsma JB, Black CN, et al. Drugs and pacemakers for vaso-
vagal, carotid sinus and situational syncope. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 
2011:CD004194.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on November 12, 2025

2017 ACC/AHA/HRS Syncope Guideline
Circulation. 2017;136:e60–e122. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000499 August 1, 2017
 e107
CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINES 370. Rebecchi M, de Ruvo E, Strano S, et al. Ganglionated plexi ablation in 
right atrium to treat cardioinhibitory neurocardiogenic syncope. J Interv 
Card Electrophysiol. 2012;34:231–5.
 371. Yao Y, Shi R, Wong T, et al. Endocardial autonomic denervation of the left atrium to treat vasovagal syncope: an early experience in humans. Circ 
Arrhythm Electrophysiol. 2012;5:279–86.
 372. Pachon JC.M, Pachon EI.M, Cunha Pachon MZ, et al. Catheter ablation of 
severe neurally meditated reflex (neurocardiogenic or vasovagal) synco-
pe: cardioneuroablation long-term results. Europace. 2011;13:1231–42.
 373. Brignole M, Croci F, Menozzi C, et al. Isometric arm counter-pressure 
maneuvers to abort impending vasovagal syncope. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2002;40:2053–9.
 374. Krediet CT.P , van Dijk N, Linzer M, et al. Management of vasovagal syn-
cope: controlling or aborting faints by leg crossing and muscle tensing. 
Circulation. 2002;106:1684–9.
 375. van Dijk N, Quartieri F, Blanc JJ, et al. Effectiveness of physical coun-
terpressure maneuvers in preventing vasovagal syncope: the Physical 
Counterpressure Manoeuvres Trial (PC-Trial). J Am Coll Cardiol. 2006;48:1652–7.
 376. Perez-Lugones A, Schweikert R, Pavia S, et al. Usefulness of midodrine in patients with severely symptomatic neurocardiogenic syncope: a ran-
domized control study. J Cardiovasc Electrophysiol. 2001;12:935–8.
 377. Samniah N, Sakaguchi S, Lurie KG, et al. Efficacy and safety of mido-
drine hydrochloride in patients with refractory vasovagal syncope. Am J 
Cardiol. 2001;88:A780–3
 378. Ward CR, Gray JC, Gilroy JJ, et al. Midodrine: a role in the management of neurocardiogenic syncope. Heart. 1998;79:45–9.
 379. Romme JCM, van Dijk N, Go-Schön IK, et al. Effectiveness of mido-
drine treatment in patients with recurrent vasovagal syncope not re-
sponding to non-pharmacological treatment (STAND-trial). Europace. 
2011;13:1639–47.
 380. Kaufmann H, Saadia D, Voustianiouk A, et al. Norepinephrine pre-
cursor therapy in neurogenic orthostatic hypotension. Circulation. 
2003;108:724–8.
 381. Qingyou Z, Junbao D, Chaoshu T. The efficacy of midodrine hydro-
chloride in the treatment of children with vasovagal syncope. J Pediatr. 
2006;149:777–80.
 382. Duygu H, Zoghi M, Turk U, et al. The role of tilt training in preventing recurrent syncope in patients with vasovagal syncope: a prospective and randomized study. Pacing Clin Electrophysiol. 2008;31:592–6.
 383. Foglia-Manzillo G, Giada F, Gaggioli G, et al. Efficacy of tilt training in the treatment of neurally mediated syncope. A randomized study. Europace. 
2004;6:199–204.
 384. Kinay O, Yazici M, Nazli C, et al. Tilt training for recurrent neurocar -
diogenic syncope: effectiveness, patient compliance, and scheduling the 
frequency of training sessions. Jpn Heart J. 2004;45:833–43.
 385. On YK, Park J, Huh J, et al. Is home orthostatic self-training effective in preventing neurally mediated syncope? Pacing Clin Electrophysiol. 
2007;30:638–43.
 386. Reybrouck T, Heidbüchel H, Van De Werf F, et al. Long-term follow-up 
results of tilt training therapy in patients with recurrent neurocardiogenic 
syncope. Pacing Clin Electrophysiol. 2002;25:1441–6.
 387. Di Girolamo E, Di Iorio C, Leonzio L, et al. Usefulness of a tilt training program for the prevention of refractory neurocardiogenic syncope in 
adolescents: A controlled study. Circulation. 1999;100:1798–801.
 388. Sheldon R, Raj SR, Rose MS, et al. Fludrocortisone for the prevention of 
vasovagal syncope: a randomized, placebo-Controlled trial. J Am Coll 
Cardiol. 2016;68:1–9.
 389. Salim MA, Di Sessa TG. Effectiveness of fludrocortisone and salt in pre-venting syncope recurrence in children: a double-blind, placebo-con-trolled, randomized trial. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2005;45:484–8.
 390. Brignole M, Menozzi C, Gianfranchi L, et al. A controlled trial of acute and long-term medical therapy in tilt-induced neurally mediated synco-
pe. Am J Cardiol. 1992;70:339–42.
 391. Flevari P , Livanis EG, Theodorakis GN, et al. Vasovagal syncope: a pro-spective, randomized, crossover evaluation of the effect of propranolol, 
nadolol and placebo on syncope recurrence and patients’ well-being. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2002;40:499–504.
 392. Sheldon R, Connolly S, Rose S, et al. Prevention of Syncope Trial (POST): a randomized, placebo-controlled study of metoprolol in the prevention 
of vasovagal syncope. Circulation. 2006;113:1164–70.
 393. Theodorakis GN, Leftheriotis D, Livanis EG, et al. Fluoxetine vs. propranolol 
in the treatment of vasovagal syncope: a prospective, randomized, placebo-
controlled study. Europace. 2006;8:193–8. 394. Sheldon RS, Morillo CA, Klingenheben T, et al. Age-dependent ef-
fect of beta-blockers in preventing vasovagal syncope. Circ Arrhythm 
Electrophysiol. 2012;5:920–6.
 395. Sheldon R, Rose S, Flanagan P , et al. Effect of beta blockers on the time to first syncope recurrence in patients after a positive isoproterenol tilt table 
test. Am J Cardiol. 1996;78:536–9.
 396. El-Sayed H, Hainsworth R. Salt supplement increases plasma volume 
and orthostatic tolerance in patients with unexplained syncope. Heart. 
1996;75:134–40.
 397. Lu CC, Li MH, Ho ST, et al. Glucose reduces the effect of water to pro-mote orthostatic tolerance. Am J Hypertens. 2008;21:1177–82.
 398. Schroeder C, Bush VE, Norcliffe LJ, et al. Water drinking acutely improves 
orthostatic tolerance in healthy subjects. Circulation. 2002;106:2806–11.
 399. Pitt MS, Hainsworth R. Contrasting effects of carbohydrate and water on 
blood pressure responses to postural maneuvers in patients with postur -
ally related (vasovagal) syncope. Clin Auton Res. 2004;14:249–54.
 400. Gaggioli G, Bottoni N, Mureddu R, et al. Effects of chronic vasodilator 
therapy to enhance susceptibility to vasovagal syncope during upright tilt testing. Am J Cardiol. 1997;80:1092–4.
 401. Di Girolamo E, Di Iorio C, Sabatini P , et al. Effects of paroxetine hydro-chloride, a selective serotonin reuptake inhibitor, on refractory vasovagal 
syncope: a randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled study. J Am 
Coll Cardiol. 1999;33:1227–30.
 402. Takata TS, Wasmund SL, Smith ML, et al. Serotonin reuptake inhibitor 
(Paxil) does not prevent the vasovagal reaction associated with carotid si-
nus massage and/or lower body negative pressure in healthy volunteers. 
Circulation. 2002;106:1500–4.
 403. Grubb BP , Samoil D, Kosinski D, et al. Fluoxetine hydrochloride for the 
treatment of severe refractory orthostatic hypotension. Am J Med. 
1994;97:366–8.
 404. Ammirati F, Colivicchi F, Santini M. Permanent cardiac pacing versus 
medical treatment for the prevention of recurrent vasovagal syncope: a 
multicenter, randomized, controlled trial. Circulation. 2001;104:52–7.
 405. Brignole M, Menozzi C, Moya A, et al. Pacemaker therapy in patients with 
neurally mediated syncope and documented asystole: Third International 
Study on Syncope of Uncertain Etiology (ISSUE-3): a randomized trial. 
Circulation. 2012;125:2566–71.
 406. Connolly SJ, Sheldon R, Roberts RS, et al. The North American Vasovagal Pacemaker Study (VPS). A randomized trial of permanent cardiac pacing for the prevention of vasovagal syncope. J Am Coll Cardiol. 
1999;33:16–20.
 407. Connolly SJ, Sheldon R, Thorpe KE, et al. Pacemaker therapy for pre-vention of syncope in patients with recurrent severe vasovagal syncope: 
Second Vasovagal Pacemaker Study (VPS II): a randomized trial. JAMA. 2003;289:2224–9.
 408. Raviele A, Giada F, Menozzi C, et al. A randomized, double-blind, pla-
cebo-controlled study of permanent cardiac pacing for the treatment 
of recurrent tilt-induced vasovagal syncope. The vasovagal syncope and 
pacing trial (SYNPACE). Eur Heart J. 2004;25:1741–8.
 409. Sutton R. Pacing in patients with carotid sinus and vasovagal syndromes. 
Pacing Clin Electrophysiol. 1989;12:1260–3.
 410. Sutton R, Brignole M, Menozzi C, et al. Dual-chamber pacing in the treatment of neurally mediated tilt-positive cardioinhibitory  syncope: 
pacemaker versus no therapy: a multicenter randomized study. The Vasovagal Syncope International Study (VASIS) Investigators. Circulation. 2000;102:294–9.
 411. Deharo JC, Guieu R, Mechulan A, et al. Syncope without prodromes in patients with normal heart and normal electrocardiogram: a distinct en-
tity. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2013;62:1075–80.
 412. Occhetta E, Bortnik M, Audoglio R, et al. Closed loop stimulation in pre-
vention of vasovagal syncope. Inotropy Controlled Pacing in Vasovagal Syncope (INVASY): a multicentre randomized, single blind, controlled study. Europace. 2004;6:538–47.
 413. Brignole M, Menozzi C, Lolli G, et al. Long-term outcome of paced and nonpaced patients with severe carotid sinus syndrome. Am J Cardiol. 
1992;69:1039–43.
 414. Thomas JE. Hyperactive carotid sinus reflex and carotid sinus syncope. 
Mayo Clin Proc. 1969;44:127–39.
 415. Healey J, Connolly SJ, Morillo CA. The management of patients with carotid sinus syndrome: is pacing the answer? Clin Auton Res. 2004;14 
suppl 1:80–6.
 416. Miller VM, Kenny RA, Slade JY, et al. Medullary autonomic pathol-
ogy in carotid sinus hypersensitivity. Neuropathol Appl Neurobiol. 
2008;34:403–11.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on November 12, 2025

Shen et al
August 1, 2017 Circulation. 2017;136:e60–e122. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000499
 e108 417. Puggioni E, Guiducci V, Brignole M, et al. Results and complications of 
the carotid sinus massage performed according to the “method of symp-
toms”. Am J Cardiol. 2002;89:599–601.
 418. Munro NC, McIntosh S, Lawson J, et al. Incidence of complications after carotid sinus massage in older patients with syncope. J Am Geriatr Soc. 
1994;42:1248–51.
 419. Brignole M, Menozzi C. The natural history of carotid sinus syncope and 
the effect of cardiac pacing. Europace. 2011;13:462–4.
 420. Brignole M, Deharo JC, De Roy L, et al. Syncope due to idiopathic par -
oxysmal atrioventricular block: long-term follow-up of a distinct form of 
atrioventricular block. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2011;58:167–73.
 421. Claesson JE, Kristensson BE, Edvardsson N, et al. Less syncope and milder 
symptoms in patients treated with pacing for induced cardioinhibitory 
carotid sinus syndrome: a randomized study. Europace. 2007;9:932–6.
 422. Parry SW, Steen N, Bexton RS, et al. Pacing in elderly recurrent fallers with carotid sinus hypersensitivity: a randomised, double-blind, placebo 
controlled crossover trial. Heart. 2009;95:405–9.
 423. Lopes R, Gonçalves A, Campos J, et al. The role of pacemaker in hyper -
sensitive carotid sinus syndrome. Europace. 2011;13:572–5.
 424. Maggi R, Menozzi C, Brignole M, et al. Cardioinhibitory carotid sinus 
hypersensitivity predicts an asystolic mechanism of spontaneous neurally 
mediated syncope. Europace. 2007;9:563–7.
 425. Gaggioli G, Brignole M, Menozzi C, et al. A positive response to 
head-up tilt testing predicts syncopal recurrence in carotid sinus syn-
drome patients with permanent pacemakers. Am J Cardiol. 1995;76: 
720–2.
 426. Sugrue DD, Gersh BJ, Holmes DR Jr, et al. Symptomatic “isolated” carotid sinus hypersensitivity: natural history and results of treatment with anti-cholinergic drugs or pacemaker. J Am Coll Cardiol. 1986;7:158–62.
 427. Brignole M, Sartore B, Barra M, et al. Is DDD superior to VVI pacing in mixed carotid sinus syndrome? An acute and medium-term study. Pacing Clin Electrophysiol. 1988;11:1902–10.
 428. Madigan NP , Flaker GC, Curtis JJ, et al. Carotid sinus hypersensitiv-ity: beneficial effects of dual-chamber pacing. Am J Cardiol. 1984;53: 1034–40.
 429. McLeod CJ, Trusty JM, Jenkins SM, et al. Method of pacing does not affect the recurrence of syncope in carotid sinus syndrome. Pacing Clin 
Electrophysiol. 2012;35:827–33.
 430. Morley CA, Perrins EJ, Grant P , et al. Carotid sinus syncope treated by 
pacing. Analysis of persistent symptoms and role of atrioventricular se-
quential pacing. Br Heart J. 1982;47:411–8.
 431. Allan L, Johns E, Doshi M, et al. Abnormalities of sympathetic and para-sympathetic autonomic function in subjects with defaecation syncope. 
Europace. 2004;6:192–8.
 432. Bae MH, Kang JK, Kim NY, et al. Clinical characteristics of defecation and micturition syncope compared with common vasovagal syncope. Pacing 
Clin Electrophysiol. 2012;35:341–7.
 433. Bonekat HW, Miles RM, Staats BA. Smoking and cough syncope:  follow-up in 45 cases. Int J Addict. 1987;22:413–9.
 434. Dicpinigaitis PV, Lim L, Farmakidis C. Cough syncope. Respir Med. 
2014;108:244–51.
 435. Garg S, Girotra M, Glasser S, et al. Swallow syncope: clinical presenta-tion, diagnostic criteria, and therapeutic options. Saudi J Gastroenterol. 
2014;20:207–11.
 436. Kapoor WN, Peterson JR, Karpf M. Micturition syncope. A reappraisal. 
JAMA. 1985;253:796–8.
 437. Komatsu K, Sumiyoshi M, Abe H, et al. Clinical characteristics of def-ecation syncope compared with micturition syncope. Circ J. 2010;74: 
307–11.
 438. Anley C, Noakes T, Collins M, et al. A comparison of two treatment pro-
tocols in the management of exercise-associated postural hypotension: a randomised clinical trial. Br J Sports Med. 2011;45:1113–8.
 439. Raj SR, Biaggioni I, Black BK, et al. Sodium paradoxically reduces the 
gastropressor response in patients with orthostatic hypotension. 
Hypertension. 2006;48:329–34.
 440. Humm AM, Mason LM, Mathias CJ. Effects of water drinking on car -
diovascular responses to supine exercise and on orthostatic hypotension after exercise in pure autonomic failure. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatr. 
2008;79:1160–4.
 441. Jordan J, Shannon JR, Grogan E, et al. A potent pressor response elicited by drinking water. Lancet. 1999;353:723.
 442. Jordan J, Shannon JR, Black BK, et al. The pressor response to wa-
ter drinking in humans: a sympathetic reflex? Circulation. 2000;101:  
504–9. 443. Shannon JR, Diedrich A, Biaggioni I, et al. Water drinking as a treatment for orthostatic syndromes. Am J Med. 2002;112:355–60.
 444. Young TM, Mathias CJ. The effects of water ingestion on orthostatic hypotension in two groups of chronic autonomic failure: multiple sys-
tem atrophy and pure autonomic failure. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatr. 
2004;75:1737–41.
 445. Clarke DA, Medow MS, Taneja I, et al. Initial orthostatic hypotension in 
the young is attenuated by static handgrip. J Pediatr. 2010;156:1019–22, 
22.e1.
 446. Krediet CTP , van Lieshout JJ, Bogert LWJ, et al. Leg crossing improves orthostatic tolerance in healthy subjects: a placebo-controlled crossover study. Am J Physiol Heart Circ Physiol. 2006;291:H1768–72.
 447. ten Harkel AD, van Lieshout JJ, Wieling W. Effects of leg muscle pumping 
and tensing on orthostatic arterial pressure: a study in normal subjects 
and patients with autonomic failure. Clin Sci. 1994;87:553–8.
 448. Thijs RD, Wieling W, van den Aardweg JG, et al. Respiratory counterma-
neuvers in autonomic failure. Neurology. 2007;69:582–5.
 449. Tutaj M, Marthol H, Berlin D, et al. Effect of physical countermaneu-
vers on orthostatic hypotension in familial dysautonomia. J Neurol. 
2006;253:65–72.
 450. van Lieshout JJ, ten Harkel AD, Wieling W. Physical manoeuvres for combating orthostatic dizziness in autonomic failure. Lancet. 
1992;339:897–8.
 451. Denq JC, Opfer-Gehrking TL, Giuliani M, et al. Efficacy of compression 
of different capacitance beds in the amelioration of orthostatic hypoten-
sion. Clin Auton Res. 1997;7:321–6.
 452. Platts SH, Tuxhorn JA, Ribeiro LC, et al. Compression garments as countermeasures to orthostatic intolerance. Aviat Space Environ Med. 2009;80:437–42.
 453. Podoleanu C, Maggi R, Brignole M, et al. Lower limb and abdominal compression bandages prevent progressive orthostatic hypotension in elderly persons: a randomized single-blind controlled study. J Am Coll 
Cardiol. 2006;48:1425–32.
 454. Figueroa JJ, Singer W, Sandroni P , et al. Effects of patient-controlled ab-
dominal compression on standing systolic blood pressure in adults with 
orthostatic hypotension. Arch Phys Med Rehabil. 2015;96:505–10.
 455. Yamamoto N, Sasaki E, Goda K, et al. Treatment of post-dialytic ortho-static hypotension with an inflatable abdominal band in hemodialysis 
patients. Kidney Int. 2006;70:1793–800.
 456. Henry R, Rowe J, O’Mahony D. Haemodynamic analysis of efficacy of 
compression hosiery in elderly fallers with orthostatic hypotension. 
Lancet. 1999;354:45–6.
 457. Protheroe CL, Dikareva A, Menon C, et al. Are compression stock-ings an effective treatment for orthostatic presyncope? PLoS ONE. 2011;6:e28193
 458. Axelrod FB, Krey L, Glickstein JS, et al. Preliminary observations on the 
use of midodrine in treating orthostatic hypotension in familial dysauto-
nomia. J Auton Nerv Syst. 1995;55:29–35.
 459. Fouad-Tarazi FM, Okabe M, Goren H. Alpha sympathomimetic treatment of autonomic insufficiency with orthostatic hypotension. Am J Med. 1995;99:604–10.
 460. Jankovic J, Gilden JL, Hiner BC, et al. Neurogenic orthostatic hypoten-sion: a double-blind, placebo-controlled study with midodrine. Am J 
Med. 1993;95:38–48.
 461. Jordan J, Shannon JR, Biaggioni I, et al. Contrasting actions of pressor 
agents in severe autonomic failure. Am J Med. 1998;105:116–24.
 462. Kaufmann H, Brannan T, Krakoff L, et al. Treatment of orthostatic hy-potension due to autonomic failure with a peripheral alpha-adrenergic 
agonist (midodrine). Neurology. 1988;38:951–6.
 463. Low PA, Gilden JL, Freeman R, et al. Efficacy of midodrine vs placebo in 
neurogenic orthostatic hypotension. A randomized, double-blind multi-center study. Midodrine Study Group. JAMA. 1997;277:1046–51.
 464. Phillips AA, Krassioukov AV, Ainslie PN, et al. Perturbed and spontane-
ous regional cerebral blood flow responses to changes in blood pressure 
after high-level spinal cord injury: the effect of midodrine. J Appl Physiol. 
2014;116:645–53.
 465. Ramirez CE, Okamoto LE, Arnold AC, et al. Efficacy of atomoxetine ver -
sus midodrine for the treatment of orthostatic hypotension in autonomic failure. Hypertension. 2014;64:1235–40.
 466. Singer W, Sandroni P , Opfer-Gehrking TL, et al. Pyridostigmine treatment trial in neurogenic orthostatic hypotension. Arch Neurol. 2006;63:513–8.
 467. Wright RA, Kaufmann HC, Perera R, et al. A double-blind, dose-response 
study of midodrine in neurogenic orthostatic hypotension. Neurology. 
1998;51:120–4.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on November 12, 2025

2017 ACC/AHA/HRS Syncope Guideline
Circulation. 2017;136:e60–e122. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000499 August 1, 2017
 e109
CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINES 468. Biaggioni I, Freeman R, Mathias CJ, et al. Randomized withdrawal study 
of patients with symptomatic neurogenic orthostatic hypotension re-
sponsive to droxidopa. Hypertension. 2015;65:101–7.
 469. Freeman R, Landsberg L, Young J. The treatment of neurogenic ortho-static hypotension with 3,4-DL-threo-dihydroxyphenylserine: a random-
ized, placebo-controlled, crossover trial. Neurology. 1999;53:2151–7.
 470. Kaufmann H, Freeman R, Biaggioni I, et al. Droxidopa for neurogenic 
orthostatic hypotension: a randomized, placebo-controlled, phase 3 trial. 
Neurology. 2014;83:328–35.
 471. Mathias CJ, Senard JM, Braune S, et al. L-threo-dihydroxyphenylserine (L-threo-DOPS; droxidopa) in the management of neurogenic ortho-static hypotension: a multi-national, multi-center, dose-ranging study 
in multiple system atrophy and pure autonomic failure. Clin Auton Res. 
2001;11:235–42.
 472. Hauser RA, Hewitt LA, Isaacson S. Droxidopa in patients with neurogenic orthostatic hypotension associated with Parkinson’s disease (NOH306A). 
J Parkinsons Dis. 2014;4:57–65.
 473. Campbell IW, Ewing DJ, Clarke BF. 9-Alpha-fluorohydrocortisone in the 
treatment of postural hypotension in diabetic autonomic neuropathy. 
Diabetes. 1975;24:381–4.
 474. Kochar MS, Itskovitz HD. Treatment of idiopathic orthostatic hypotension (Shy-Drager syndrome) with indomethacin. Lancet. 1978;1:1011–4.
 475. Schoffer KL, Henderson RD, O’Maley K, et al. Nonpharmacological treat-
ment, fludrocortisone, and domperidone for orthostatic hypotension in 
Parkinson’s disease. Mov Disord. 2007;22:1543–9.
 476. Vernikos J, Convertino VA. Advantages and disadvantages of fludrocor -
tisone or saline load in preventing post-spaceflight orthostatic hypoten-
sion. Acta Astronaut. 1994;33:259–66.
 477. Rowe PC, Calkins H, DeBusk K, et al. Fludrocortisone acetate to treat 
neurally mediated hypotension in chronic fatigue syndrome: a random-
ized controlled trial. JAMA. 2001;285:52–9.
 478. Shi SJ, South DA, Meck JV. Fludrocortisone does not prevent orthostatic 
hypotension in astronauts after spaceflight. Aviat Space Environ Med. 
2004;75:235–9.
 479. Gupta V, Lipsitz LA. Orthostatic hypotension in the elderly: diagnosis and 
treatment. Am J Med. 2007;120:841–7.
 480. Coursin DB, Wood KE. Corticosteroid supplementation for adrenal insuf-ficiency. JAMA. 2002;287:236–40.
 481. Shibao C, Okamoto LE, Gamboa A, et al. Comparative efficacy of yohim-
bine against pyridostigmine for the treatment of orthostatic hypotension 
in autonomic failure. Hypertension. 2010;56:847–51.
 482. Singer W, Opfer-Gehrking TL, Nickander KK, et al. Acetylcholinesterase inhibition in patients with orthostatic intolerance. J Clin Neurophysiol. 
2006;23:476–81.
 483. Gales BJ, Gales MA. Pyridostigmine in the treatment of orthostatic intol-erance. Ann Pharmacother. 2007;41:314–8.
 484. Bordet R, Benhadjali J, Destée A, et al. Octreotide effects on orthostatic hypotension in patients with multiple system atrophy: a controlled study 
of acute administration. Clin Neuropharmacol. 1995;18:83–9.
 485. Hoeldtke RD, Dworkin GE, Gaspar SR, et al. Effect of the somatostatin 
analogue SMS-201–995 on the adrenergic response to glucose ingestion 
in patients with postprandial hypotension. Am J Med. 1989;86:673–7.
 486. Jarvis SS, Florian JP , Curren MJ, et al. A somatostatin analog improves tilt table tolerance by decreasing splanchnic vascular conductance. J Appl 
Physiol. 2012;112:1504–11.
 487. Raimbach SJ, Cortelli P , Kooner JS, et al. Prevention of glucose-induced 
hypotension by the somatostatin analogue octreotide (SMS 201–995) in 
chronic autonomic failure: haemodynamic and hormonal changes. Clin 
Sci (Lond). 1989;77:623–8.
 488. Craig GM. Clinical presentation of orthostatic hypotension in the elderly. 
Postgrad Med J. 1994;70:638–42.
 489. McLachlan CY.L, Yi M, Ling A, et al. Adverse drug events are a major cause of acute medical admission. Intern Med J. 2014;44:633–8.
 490. Poon IO, Braun U. High prevalence of orthostatic hypotension and its cor -
relation with potentially causative medications among elderly veterans. J 
Clin Pharm Ther. 2005;30:173–8.
 491. Beckett NS, Connor M, Sadler JD, et al. Orthostatic fall in blood pressure 
in the very elderly hypertensive: results from the hypertension in the very 
elderly trial (HYVET) - pilot. J Hum Hypertens. 1999;13:839–40.
 492. Fotherby MD, Potter JF. Orthostatic hypotension and anti-hypertensive therapy in the elderly. Postgrad Med J. 1994;70:878–81.
 493. Räihä I, Luutonen S, Piha J, et al. Prevalence, predisposing factors, 
and prognostic importance of postural hypotension. Arch Intern Med. 
1995;155:930–5. 494. Perner A, De Backer D. Understanding hypovolaemia. Intensive Care 
Med. 2014;40:613–5.
 495. Journeay WS, Reardon FD, Jean-Gilles S, et al. Lower body positive and negative pressure alter thermal and hemodynamic responses after exer -
cise. Aviat Space Environ Med. 2004;75:841–9.
 496. Huang JJ, Desai C, Singh N, et al. Summer syncope syndrome redux. Am J Med. 2015;128:1140–3.
 497. Lucas RAI, Ganio MS, Pearson J, et al. Sweat loss during heat stress con-tributes to subsequent reductions in lower-body negative pressure toler -
ance. Exp Physiol. 2013;98:473–80.
 498. Jeukendrup AE, Currell K, Clarke J, et al. Effect of beverage glucose and sodium content on fluid delivery. Nutr Metab (Lond). 2009;6:9.
 499. Maughan RJ, Leiper JB. Sodium intake and post-exercise rehydration in 
man. Eur J Appl Physiol Occup Physiol. 1995;71:311–9.
 500. Merson SJ, Maughan RJ, Shirreffs SM. Rehydration with drinks differing in sodium concentration and recovery from moderate exercise-induced 
hypohydration in man. Eur J Appl Physiol. 2008;103:585–94.
 501. Shirreffs SM, Taylor AJ, Leiper JB, et al. Post-exercise rehydration in man: 
effects of volume consumed and drink sodium content. Med Sci Sports 
Exerc. 1996;28:1260–71.
 502. Atherly-John YC, Cunningham SJ, Crain EF. A randomized trial of oral vs intravenous rehydration in a pediatric emergency department. Arch 
Pediatr Adolesc Med. 2002;156:1240–3.
 503. Greenleaf JE, Jackson CG, Geelen G, et al. Plasma volume expansion with 
oral fluids in hypohydrated men at rest and during exercise. Aviat Space 
Environ Med. 1998;69:837–44.
 504. Kenefick RW, O’Moore KM, Mahood NV, et al. Rapid IV versus oral re-hydration: responses to subsequent exercise heat stress. Med Sci Sports Exerc. 2006;38:2125–31.
 505. Holtzhausen LM, Noakes TD. The prevalence and significance of post-exercise (postural) hypotension in ultramarathon runners. Med Sci Sports Exerc. 1995;27:1595–601.
 506. Evans GH, Shirreffs SM, Maughan RJ. Postexercise rehydration in man: the effects of osmolality and carbohydrate content of ingested drinks. Nutrition. 2009;25:905–13.
 507. Blake AJ, Morgan K, Bendall MJ, et al. Falls by elderly people at home: prevalence and associated factors. Age Ageing. 1988;17:365–72.
 508. Burke V, Beilin LJ, German R, et al. Postural fall in blood pressure in the elderly in relation to drug treatment and other lifestyle factors. Q J Med. 1992;84:583–91.
 509. Jansen RW, Kelly-Gagnon MM, Lipsitz LA. Intraindividual reproducibility of postprandial and orthostatic blood pressure changes in older nursing-
home patients: relationship with chronic use of cardiovascular medica-
tions. J Am Geriatr Soc. 1996;44:383–9.
 510. Kamaruzzaman S, Watt H, Carson C, et al. The association between or -
thostatic hypotension and medication use in the British Women’s Heart 
and Health Study. Age Ageing. 2010;39:51–6.
 511. Ooi WL, Barrett S, Hossain M, et al. Patterns of orthostatic blood pressure change and their clinical correlates in a frail, elderly population. JAMA. 
1997;277:1299–304.
 512. Jodaitis L, Vaillant F, Snacken M, et al. Orthostatic hypotension and 
associated conditions in geriatric inpatients. Acta Clin Belg. 2015;70:  
251–8.
 513. Panayiotou B, Saeed S, Fotherby M, et al. Antihypertensive therapy and 
orthostatic hemodynamic responses in acute stroke. Am J Hypertens. 2002;15:37–41.
 514. Kanjwal K, Karabin B, Sheikh M, et al. Pyridostigmine in the treatment of postural orthostatic tachycardia: a single-center experience. Pacing Clin 
Electrophysiol. 2011;34:750–5.
 515. Shibao C, Arzubiaga C, Roberts LJ, et al. Hyperadrenergic postural 
tachycardia syndrome in mast cell activation disorders. Hypertension. 2005;45:385–90.
 516. Shibata S, Fu Q, Bivens TB, et al. Short-term exercise training improves 
the cardiovascular response to exercise in the postural orthostatic tachy-
cardia syndrome. J Physiol. 2012;590:3495–505.
 517. Fu Q, Vangundy TB, Shibata S, et al. Exercise training versus proprano-lol in the treatment of the postural orthostatic tachycardia syndrome. Hypertension. 2011;58:167–75.
 518. Gaffney FA, Lane LB, Pettinger W, et al. Effects of long-term clonidine administration on the hemodynamic and neuroendocrine postural re-
sponses of patients with dysautonomia. Chest. 1983;83:436–8.
 519. Green EA, Raj V, Shibao CA, et al. Effects of norepinephrine reup-
take inhibition on postural tachycardia syndrome. J Am Heart Assoc. 
2013;2:e000395.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on November 12, 2025

Shen et al
August 1, 2017 Circulation. 2017;136:e60–e122. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000499
 e110 520. Raj SR, Black BK, Biaggioni I, et al. Propranolol decreases tachycardia and 
improves symptoms in the postural tachycardia syndrome: less is more. 
Circulation. 2009;120:725–34.
 521. Ross AJ, Ocon AJ, Medow MS, et al. A double-blind placebo-controlled cross-over study of the vascular effects of midodrine in neuropathic 
compared with hyperadrenergic postural tachycardia syndrome. Clin Sci. 2014;126:289–96.
 522. Figueroa RA, Arnold AC, Nwazue VC, et al. Acute volume loading and exercise capacity in postural tachycardia syndrome. J Appl Physiol. 
2014;117:663–8.
 523. Garland EM, Robertson D. Chiari I malformation as a cause of ortho-
static intolerance symptoms: a media myth? Am J Med. 2001;111: 
546–52.
 524. Hubsch C, Baumann C, Hingray C, et al. Clinical classification of psycho-
genic non-epileptic seizures based on video-EEG analysis and automatic 
clustering. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatr. 2011;82:955–60.
 525. Iglesias JF, Graf D, Forclaz A, et al. Stepwise evaluation of unexplained 
syncope in a large ambulatory population. Pacing Clin Electrophysiol. 2009;32 Suppl 1:S202–6.
 526. Elliott JO, Charyton C. Biopsychosocial predictors of psychogenic non-epileptic seizures. Epilepsy Res. 2014;108:1543–53.
 527. Mayor R, Howlett S, Grünewald R, et al. Long-term outcome of brief augmented psychodynamic interpersonal therapy for psychogenic non-epileptic seizures: seizure control and health care utilization. Epilepsia. 
2010;51:1169–76.
 528. Mayor R, Brown RJ, Cock H, et al. Short-term outcome of psychogenic non-epileptic seizures after communication of the diagnosis. Epilepsy 
Behav. 2012;25:676–81.
 529. LaFrance WC Jr, Keitner GI, Papandonatos GD, et al. Pilot pharmaco-
logic randomized controlled trial for psychogenic nonepileptic seizures. 
Neurology. 2010;75:1166–73.
 530. Goldstein LH, Chalder T, Chigwedere C, et al. Cognitive-behavioral 
therapy for psychogenic nonepileptic seizures: a pilot RCT. Neurology. 
2010;74:1986–94.
 531. Reuber M, Burness C, Howlett S, et al. Tailored psychotherapy for pa-
tients with functional neurological symptoms: a pilot study. J Psychosom 
Res. 2007;63:625–32.
 532. Santos NdO, Benute GRG, Santiago A, et al. Psychogenic non-epileptic seizures and psychoanalytical treatment: results. Rev Assoc Med Bras. 2014;60:577–84.
 533. Zeng W, Deng H. Cough syncope: constrictive pericarditis. Intern Med. 2013;52:463–5.
 534. Guaricci AI, Basso C, Tarantini G. Recurrent syncope on effort due to concealed constrictive pericarditis. Eur Heart J. 2013;34:1817
 535. Dhar R, Duke RJ, Sealey BJ. Cough syncope from constrictive pericarditis: a case report. Can J Cardiol. 2003;19:295–6.
 536. Vasquez AF, Seger JJ. An uncommon case of heart failure. South Med J. 2009;102:1183–5.
 537. Sviggum HP , Kopp SL, Rettke SR, et al. Perioperative complications in patients with left ventricular non-compaction. Eur J Anaesthesiol. 2011;28:207–12.
 538. Koh C, Lee PW, Yung TC, et al. Left ventricular noncompaction in chil-dren. Congenit Heart Dis. 2009;4:288–94.
 539. Enriquez SG, Entem FR, Cobo M, et al. Uncommon etiology of syn-cope in a patient with isolated ventricular noncompaction. Pacing Clin Electrophysiol. 2007;30:577–9.
 540. Rovetta R, Bonadei I, Vizzardi E, et al. Syncope as presentation of recur -
rent Tako-Tsubo cardiomyopathy. Minerva Cardioangiol. 2014;62:366–8.
 541. Yoshida T, Hibino T, Fujimaki T, et al. Transient mid-ventricular ballooning syndrome complicated by syncope: a variant of tako-tsubo cardiomyopa-thy. Int J Cardiol. 2009;135:e20–e23.
 542. Tisserand G, Gil H, Méaux-Ruault N, et al. [Clinical features of pulmo-nary embolism in elderly: a comparative study of 64 patients]. Rev Med 
Interne. 2014;35:353–6.
 543. Chakraborty A, Jutley G. Isolated syncope - an uncommon presenting feature of pulmonary embolism. Acute Med. 2011;10:79–80.
 544. Linhart A, Kampmann C, Zamorano JL, et al. Cardiac manifestations of 
Anderson-Fabry disease: results from the international Fabry outcome 
survey. Eur Heart J. 2007;28:1228–35.
 545. Acharya D, Robertson P , Kay GN, et al. Arrhythmias in Fabry cardiomy-opathy. Clin Cardiol. 2012;35:738–40.
 546. Hwang YT, Tseng CD, Hwang JJ, et al. Cardiac amyloidosis presenting 
as sick sinus syndrome and intractable heart failure: report of a case. J 
Formos Med Assoc. 1993;92:283–7. 547. Velazquez-Ceceña JL, Lubell DL, Nagajothi N, et al. Syncope from dy-
namic left ventricular outflow tract obstruction simulating hypertrophic 
cardiomyopathy in a patient with primary AL-type amyloid heart disease. 
Tex Heart Inst J. 2009;36:50–4.
 548. Strobel JS, Fuisz AR, Epstein AE, et al. Syncope and inducible ven-tricular fibrillation in a woman with hemochromatosis. J Interv Card Electrophysiol. 1999;3:225–9.
 549. Akashi R, Kizaki Y, Kawano H, et al. Seizures and syncope due to com-plete atrioventricular block in a patient with acute myocarditis with a 
normal left ventricular systolic function. Intern Med. 2012;51:3035–40.
 550. Mancio J, Bettencourt N, Oliveira M, et al. Acute right ventricular myocar -
ditis presenting with chest pain and syncope. BMJ Case Rep. 2013;2013.
 551. Patel RAG, DiMarco JP , Akar JG, et al. Chagas myocarditis and syncope. J 
Cardiovasc Magn Reson. 2005;7:685–8.
 552. Lopez JA, Treistman B, Massumi A. Myocarditis-associated ventricular fibrillation. An unusual cause of syncope in Wolff-Parkinson-White syn-
drome. Tex Heart Inst J. 1995;22:335–8.
 553. Dhar KL, Adlakha A, Phillip PJ. Recurrent seizures and syncope, ventricu-
lar arrhythmias with reversible prolonged Q-Tc interval in typhoid myo-
carditis. J Indian Med Assoc. 1987;85:336–7.
 554. Manek M, Kulkarni A, Viera A. Hint of Lyme, an uncommon cause of syncope. BMJ Case Rep. 2014;2014
 555. Ciesielski CA, Markowitz LE, Horsley R, et al. Lyme disease surveil-
lance in the United States, 1983–1986. Rev Infect Dis. 1989;11 suppl 
6:S1435–41.
 556. Rassi A Jr, Rassi A, Marin-Neto JA. Chagas disease. Lancet. 2010;375:1388–402.
 557. de Souza ACJ, Salles G, Hasslocher-Moreno AM, et al. Development of a 
risk score to predict sudden death in patients with Chaga’s heart disease. 
Int J Cardiol. 2015;187:700–4.
 558. Leite LR, Fenelon G, Paes AT, et al. The impact of syncope during clini-
cal presentation of sustained ventricular tachycardia on total and car -
diac mortality in patients with chronic Chagasic heart disease. Arq Bras Cardiol. 2001;77:439–52.
 559. Martinelli Filho M, Sosa E, Nishioka S, et al. Clinical and electrophysi-
ologic features of syncope in chronic chagasic heart disease. J Cardiovasc 
Electrophysiol. 1994;5:563–70.
 560. Josephson ME, Wellens HJJ. Syncope in a patient with myotonic dystro-phy. Heart Rhythm. 2015;12:1882–3.
 561. Finsterer J, Stöllberger C, Gencik M, et al. Syncope and hyperCKemia 
as minimal manifestations of short CTG repeat expansions in myotonic 
dystrophy type 1. Rev Port Cardiol. 2015;34:361–4.
 562. Brescia ST, Rossano JW, Pignatelli R, et al. Mortality and sudden death in pediatric left ventricular noncompaction in a tertiary referral center. Circulation. 2013;127:2202–8.
 563. Bhatia NL, Tajik AJ, Wilansky S, et al. Isolated noncompaction of the 
left ventricular myocardium in adults: a systematic overview. J Card Fail. 
2011;17:771–8.
 564. Hernández-Luis C, García-Morán E, Rubio-Sanz J, et al. [Kearns-Sayre syndrome: recurrent syncope and atrial flutter]. Rev Esp Cardiol. 2007;60:89–90.
 565. Letsas KP , Efremidis M, Pappas LK, et al. Pathophysiology and man-agement of syncope in Kearns-Sayre syndrome. Am Heart Hosp J. 
2006;4:301–2.
 566. Konety SH, Horwitz P , Lindower P , et al. Arrhythmias in tako-tsubo syn-
drome–benign or malignant? Int J Cardiol. 2007;114:141–4.
 567. Alampi G, Nuzzo F, Ronchi E, et al. [Lipomatous hypertrophy and Lev-Lenègre disease]. Cardiologia. 1986;31:67–70.
 568. Bracchi G, Vezzoli F, Rossi L. [The pathology of the primitive or idiopathic block (disease of Lenègre and Lev). Critical review and personal casuistic (author’s transl)]. G Ital Cardiol. 1973;3:509–18.
 569. Barlow JB. Lev’s or Lenègre’s disease? J Cardiovasc Electrophysiol. 1994;5:897
 570. Stéphan E, Aftimos G, Allam C. Familial fascicular block: histologic fea-tures of Lev’s disease. Am Heart J. 1985;109:1399–401.
 571. Rasmussen KS, Paulsen SM. [Total atrioventricular block caused by dys-trophic calcification: Lev’s disease]. Ugeskr Laeg. 1980;142:2986–7.
 572. Dubrey SW, Hawkins PN, Falk RH. Amyloid diseases of the heart: assess-
ment, diagnosis, and referral. Heart. 2011;97:75–84.
 573. Kaul P , Adluri K, Javangula K, et al. Successful management of multiple per -
manent pacemaker complications—infection, 13 year old silent lead perfo-
ration and exteriorisation following failed percutaneous extraction, superior vena cava obstruction, tricuspid valve endocarditis, pulmonary embolism 
and prosthetic tricuspid valve thrombosis. J Cardiothorac Surg. 2009;4:12
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on November 12, 2025

2017 ACC/AHA/HRS Syncope Guideline
Circulation. 2017;136:e60–e122. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000499 August 1, 2017
 e111
CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINES 574. Garg NK, Kapoor A, Sinha N. Intermittent electromechanical dissocia-
tion due to mechanical prosthetic valve dysfunction. J Heart Valve Dis. 
2000;9:466–8.
 575. Silber H, Khan SS, Matloff JM, et al. The St. Jude valve. Thrombolysis as the first line of therapy for cardiac valve thrombosis. Circulation. 1993;87:30–7.
 576. Isner JM, Hawley RJ, Weintraub AM, et al. Cardiac findings in Charcot-
Marie-Tooth disease. A prospective study of 68 patients. Arch Intern 
Med. 1979;139:1161–5.
 577. Santos I, Martín de Dios R, Barrios V, et al. [Anomalous origin of the right coronary artery from the left sinus of Valsalva. Apropos of 2 cases]. Rev 
Esp Cardiol. 1991;44:618–21.
 578. Hassan WS, Al-Habeeb WA, El-Shaer FE, et al. Exertional dizziness and 
syncope caused by anomalous left coronary artery origin from the right 
sinus of Valsalva. Saudi Med J. 2004;25:1720–2.
 579. Lilly SM, Schussler JM, Stoler RC. Anomalous origin of the right coronary artery from the left sinus of Valsalva associated with syncope in a young 
athlete. Proc (Bayl Univ Med Cent). 2011;24:13–4.
 580. Groh WJ, Bhakta D. Arrhythmia management in myotonic dystrophy 
type 1. JAMA. 2012;308:337–8; author reply 8.
 581. Kuhlmann TP , Powers RD. Painless aortic dissection: an unusual cause of syncope. Ann Emerg Med. 1984;13:549–51.
 582. Gilon D, Mehta RH, Oh JK, et al. Characteristics and in-hospital outcomes of patients with cardiac tamponade complicating type A acute aortic dis-section. Am J Cardiol. 2009;103:1029–31.
 583. Hashim PW, Assi R, Grecu L, et al. Symptomatic obstruction of the bra-chiocephalic and left subclavian arteries obscured by aortic stenosis. Ann 
Vasc Surg. 2014;28:737.e1–5.
 584. Peera MA, LoCurto M, Elfond M. A case of Takayasu arteritis causing 
subclavian steal and presenting as syncope. J Emerg Med. 2011;40:  
158–61.
 585. Akdemir R, Ozhan H, Tataroglu C. Coronary-subclavian steal syn-drome presenting with chest pain and syncope. Acta Cardiol. 2004;59: 
665–7.
 586. Chan-Tack KM. Subclavian steal syndrome: a rare but important cause of 
syncope. South Med J. 2001;94:445–7.
 587. Perryman RA, Bayne E, Miller RH. Bull-worker syncope: congenital sub-clavian steal syndrome following isometric exercise. Pediatr Cardiol. 
1991;12:105–6.
 588. Squarzoni G, Bariani L, Fogli B, et al. [Arterial hypertension and synco-
pe in an adult patient with coarctation of the aorta]. Riv Eur Sci Med 
Farmacol. 1991;13:33–5.
 589. Ahern M, Lever JV, Cosh J. Complete heart block in rheumatoid arthritis. Ann Rheum Dis. 1983;42:389–97.
 590. Villamayor-Blanco B, Arias M, Sesar-Ignacio A, et al. [Headache and faint-
ing as initial symptoms of syringomyelia associated to Arnold-Chiari and facial angiomatous nevus]. Rev Neurol. 2004;38:1035–7.
 591. Massimi L, Della Pepa GM, Caldarelli M, et al. Abrupt clinical onset of Chiari type I/syringomyelia complex: clinical and physiopathological im-
plications. Neurosurg Rev. 2012;35:321–9; discussion 9.
 592. Montfort J, Maher R, Grieve SM, et al. Syringomyelia: a rare extracar -
diac contributor to syncope detected incidentally by CMR. Int J Cardiol. 2011;150:e62–e64.
 593. Masson C, Colombani JM. [Chiari type 1 malformation and magnetic resonance imaging]. Presse Med. 2005;34:1662–7.
 594. Ziegler DK, Mallonee W. Chiari-1 malformation, migraine, and sudden 
death. Headache. 1999;39:38–41.
 595. Arias M, Castillo J, Castro A, et al. [Syncope as the initial manifestation of syringomyelia associated with an Arnold-Chiari abnormality: diagnostic 
value of computerized tomography]. Med Clin (Barc). 1986;86:550–1.
 596. Hampton F, Williams B, Loizou LA. Syncope as a presenting feature of 
hindbrain herniation with syringomyelia. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatr. 1982;45:919–22.
 597. Williams B. Simultaneous cerebral and spinal fluid pressure recordings. 
2. Cerebrospinal dissociation with lesions at the foramen magnum. Acta 
Neurochir (Wien). 1981;59:123–42.
 598. Mangubat EZ, Wilson T, Mitchell BA, et al. Chiari I malformation asso-ciated with atlanto-occipital assimilation presenting as orthopnea and cough syncope. J Clin Neurosci. 2014;21:320–3.
 599. Child JS, Perloff JK, Bach PM, et al. Cardiac involvement in Friedreich’s ataxia: a clinical study of 75 patients. J Am Coll Cardiol. 1986;7:  
1370–8.
 600. Ju JH, Kang MH, Kim HG, et al. Successful treatment of syncope with chemotherapy irresponsive to cardiac pacemaker in head and neck can-
cer. Yonsei Med J. 2009;50:725–8. 601. Okmen E, Erdinler I, Oguz E, et al. An unusual cause of reflex cardio-
vascular syncope: vagal paraganglioma. Ann Noninvasive Electrocardiol. 
2003;8:173–6.
 602. Suchard JR. Recurrent near-syncope with flushing. Acad Emerg Med. 1997;4:718–24.
 603. Roshan J, George OK, Vineet S, et al. Torsade de pointes in a case of 
pheochromocytoma–an unusual presentation of an uncommon disease. 
Indian Heart J. 2004;56:248–9.
 604. Castells M, Austen KF. Mastocytosis: mediator-related signs and symp-toms. Int Arch Allergy Immunol. 2002;127:147–52.
 605. Akin C. Anaphylaxis and mast cell disease: what is the risk? Curr Allergy 
Asthma Rep. 2010;10:34–8.
 606. Bains SN, Hsieh FH. Current approaches to the diagnosis and treatment 
of systemic mastocytosis. Ann Allergy Asthma Immunol. 2010;104:1–10.
 607. Shaffer HC, Parsons DJ, Peden DB, et al. Recurrent syncope and ana-phylaxis as presentation of systemic mastocytosis in a pediatric pa-
tient: case report and literature review. J Am Acad Dermatol. 2006;54:  
S210–3.
 608. Escribano L, Akin C, Castells M, et al. Current options in the treatment of mast cell mediator-related symptoms in mastocytosis. Inflamm Allergy 
Drug Targets. 2006;5:61–77.
 609. Koide T, Nakajima T, Makifuchi T, et al. Systemic mastocytosis and recur -
rent anaphylactic shock. Lancet. 2002;359:2084
 610. Kremastinos DT, Farmakis D, Aessopos A, et al. Beta-thalassemia cardio-
myopathy: history, present considerations, and future perspectives. Circ 
Heart Fail. 2010;3:451–8.
 611. Surges R, Scott CA, Walker MC. Peri-ictal atrioventricular conduction block in a patient with a lesion in the left insula: case report and review of the literature. Epilepsy Behav. 2009;16:347–9.
 612. Schuele SU, Bermeo AC, Alexopoulos AV, et al. Video-electrographic and clinical features in patients with ictal asystole. Neurology. 2007;69:434–41.
 613. Novy J, Carruzzo A, Pascale P , et al. Ictal bradycardia and asystole: an uncommon cause of syncope. Int J Cardiol. 2009;133:e90–3.
 614. Monté CP .J.A, de Krom MCTFM, Weber WEJ, et al. The ictal bradycardia 
syndrome. Acta Neurol Belg. 2007;107:22–5.
 615. Bruce CJ. Cardiac tumours: diagnosis and management. Heart. 2011;97:151–60.
 616. Reynen K. Cardiac myxomas. N Engl J Med. 1995;333:1610–7.
 617. Driscoll DJ, Jacobsen SJ, Porter CJ, et al. Syncope in children and adoles-cents. J Am Coll Cardiol. 1997;29:1039–45.
 618. Massin MM, Bourguignont A, Coremans C, et al. Syncope in pe-diatric patients presenting to an emergency department. J Pediatr. 
2004;145:223–8.
 619. McLeod KA. Syncope in childhood. Arch Dis Child. 2003;88:  
350–3.
 620. Chen L, Wang C, Wang H, et al. Underlying diseases in syncope of chil-dren in China. Med Sci Monit. 2011;17:PH49–PH53.
 621. Brignole M, Alboni P , Benditt D, et al. Guidelines on management (diag-nosis and treatment) of syncope. Eur Heart J. 2001;22:1256–306.
 622. Lewis DA, Dhala A. Syncope in the pediatric patient. The cardiologist’s 
perspective. Pediatr Clin North Am. 1999;46:205–19.
 623. Kanjwal K, Calkins H. Syncope in children and adolescents. Cardiol Clin. 2015;33:397–409.
 624. Lerman-Sagie T, Rechavia E, Strasberg B, et al. Head-up tilt for the evalua-
tion of syncope of unknown origin in children. J Pediatr. 1991;118:676–9.
 625. MacCormick JM, Crawford JR, Chung SK, et al. Symptoms and signs as-sociated with syncope in young people with primary cardiac arrhythmias. 
Heart Lung Circ. 2011;20:593–8.
 626. Ritter S, Tani LY, Etheridge SP , et al. What is the yield of screening echo-
cardiography in pediatric syncope? Pediatrics. 2000;105:E58.
 627. Tretter JT, Kavey RE.W. Distinguishing cardiac syncope from vasovagal syncope in a referral population. J Pediatr. 2013;163:1618–23.e1.
 628. Vlahos AP , Kolettis TM. Family history of children and adolescents with neurocardiogenic syncope. Pediatr Cardiol. 2008;29:227.
 629. Zhang Q, Du J, Wang C, et al. The diagnostic protocol in children and ad-olescents with syncope: a multi-centre prospective study. Acta Paediatr. 2009;98:879–84.
 630. Zhang Q, Zhu L, Wang C, et al. Value of history taking in children and adolescents with cardiac syncope. Cardiol Young. 2013;23:54–60.
 631. Lerman-Sagie T, Lerman P , Mukamel M, et al. A prospective evaluation of pediatric patients with syncope. Clin Pediatr (Phila). 1994;33:67–70.
 632. Wren C. Cardiac causes for syncope or sudden death in childhood. Arch 
Dis Child. 1999;81:289–91.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on November 12, 2025

Shen et al
August 1, 2017 Circulation. 2017;136:e60–e122. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000499
 e112 633. Miyake CY, Motonaga KS, Fischer-Colbrie ME, et al. Risk of cardiac dis-
ease and observations on lack of potential predictors by clinical history 
among children presenting for cardiac evaluation of mid-exertional syn-
cope. Cardiol Young20151–7.
 634. Ackerman MJ, Tester DJ, Porter CJ. Swimming, a gene-specific ar -
rhythmogenic trigger for inherited long QT syndrome. Mayo Clin Proc. 1999;74:1088–94.
 635. Schimpf R, Veltmann C, Wolpert C, et al. Channelopathies: Brugada syndrome, long QT syndrome, short QT syndrome, and CPVT. Herz. 
2009;34:281–8.
 636. Rossano J, Bloemers B, Sreeram N, et al. Efficacy of implantable loop 
recorders in establishing symptom-rhythm correlation in young patients 
with syncope and palpitations. Pediatrics. 2003;112:e228–e233.
 637. Al Dhahri KN, Potts JE, Chiu CC, et al. Are implantable loop recorders 
useful in detecting arrhythmias in children with unexplained syncope? 
Pacing Clin Electrophysiol. 2009;32:1422–7.
 638. Frangini PA, Cecchin F, Jordao L, et al. How revealing are insertable 
loop recorders in pediatrics? Pacing Clin Electrophysiol. 2008;31:  
338–43.
 639. Babikar A, Hynes B, Ward N, et al. A retrospective study of the clinical experience of the implantable loop recorder in a paediatric setting. Int J 
Clin Pract. 2008;62:1520–5.
 640. Ergul Y, Tanidir IC, Ozyilmaz I, et al. Evaluation rhythm problems in un-
explained syncope etiology with implantable loop recorder. Pediatr Int. 
2015;57:359–66.
 641. Younoszai AK, Franklin WH, Chan DP , et al. Oral fluid therapy. A prom-ising treatment for vasodepressor syncope. Arch Pediatr Adolesc Med. 
1998;152:165–8.
 642. Chu W, Wang C, Wu L, et al. Oral rehydration salts: an effective choice 
for the treatment of children with vasovagal syncope. Pediatr Cardiol. 
2015;36:867–72.
 643. Fouad FM, Sitthisook S, Vanerio G, et al. Sensitivity and specificity of the 
tilt table test in young patients with unexplained syncope. Pacing Clin 
Electrophysiol. 1993;16:394–400.
 644. Grubb BP , Temesy-Armos P , Moore J, et al. The use of head-upright tilt 
table testing in the evaluation and management of syncope in children 
and adolescents. Pacing Clin Electrophysiol. 1992;15:742–8.
 645. Numan M, Alnajjar R, Lankford J, et al. Cardiac asystole during head up tilt (HUTT) in children and adolescents: is this benign physiology? Pediatr Cardiol. 2015;36:140–5.
 646. Qingyou Z, Junbao D, Jianjun C, et al. Association of clinical character -
istics of unexplained syncope with the outcome of head-up tilt tests in 
children. Pediatr Cardiol. 2004;25:360–4.
 647. Thilenius OG, Quinones JA, Husayni TS, et al. Tilt test for diagnosis of 
unexplained syncope in pediatric patients. Pediatrics. 1991;87:334–8.
 648. Udani V, Bavdekar M, Karia S. Head up tilt test in the diagnosis of neu-
rocardiogenic syncope in childhood and adolescence. Neurol India. 
2004;52:185–7.
 649. Yilmaz S, Gökben S, Levent E, et al. Syncope or seizure? The diagnostic value of synchronous tilt testing and video-EEG monitoring in children with transient loss of consciousness. Epilepsy Behav. 2012;24:93–6.
 650. Alehan D, Celiker A, Ozme S. Head-up tilt test: a highly sensitive, specific test for children with unexplained syncope. Pediatr Cardiol. 
1996;17:86–90.
 651. Pongiglione G, Fish FA, Strasburger JF, et al. Heart rate and blood pres-
sure response to upright tilt in young patients with unexplained syncope. 
J Am Coll Cardiol. 1990;16:165–70.
 652. Ross BA, Hughes S, Anderson E, et al. Abnormal responses to orthostatic testing in children and adolescents with recurrent unexplained syncope. 
Am Heart J. 1991;122:748–54.
 653. Strieper MJ, Campbell RM. Efficacy of alpha-adrenergic ago-nist therapy for prevention of pediatric neurocardiogenic syncope.  
J Am Coll Cardiol. 1993;22:594–7.
 654. Balaji S, Oslizlok PC, Allen MC, et al. Neurocardiogenic syncope in chil-dren with a normal heart. J Am Coll Cardiol. 1994;23:779–85.
 655. Scott WA, Pongiglione G, Bromberg BI, et al. Randomized comparison of atenolol and fludrocortisone acetate in the treatment of pediatric neu-rally mediated syncope. Am J Cardiol. 1995;76:400–2.
 656. McLeod KA, Wilson N, Hewitt J, et al. Cardiac pacing for severe child-hood neurally mediated syncope with reflex anoxic seizures. Heart. 
1999;82:721–5.
 657. Kelly AM, Porter CJ, McGoon MD, et al. Breath-holding spells associated 
with significant bradycardia: successful treatment with permanent 
pacemaker implantation. Pediatrics. 2001;108:698–702. 658. Zhang Q, Jin H, Wang L, et al. Randomized comparison of metoprolol ver -
sus conventional treatment in preventing recurrence of vasovagal synco-pe in children and adolescents. Med Sci Monit. 2008;14:CR199–CR203.
 659. Müller G, Deal BJ, Strasburger JF, et al. Usefulness of metoprolol for un-explained syncope and positive response to tilt testing in young persons. 
Am J Cardiol. 1993;71:592–5.
 660. Bouchardy J, Therrien J, Pilote L, et al. Atrial arrhythmias in adults with 
congenital heart disease. Circulation. 2009;120:1679–86.
 661. Kumar S, Tedrow UB, Triedman JK. Arrhythmias in adult congenital heart disease: diagnosis and management. Cardiol Clin. 2015;33:571–88.viii.
 662. Murphy JG, Gersh BJ, Mair DD, et al. Long-term outcome in pa-
tients undergoing surgical repair of tetralogy of Fallot. N Engl J Med. 
1993;329:593–9.
 663. Mylotte D, Pilote L, Ionescu-Ittu R, et al. Specialized adult congeni-
tal heart disease care: the impact of policy on mortality. Circulation. 
2014;129:1804–12.
 664. Khairy P , Landzberg MJ, Gatzoulis MA, et al. Value of programmed ven-
tricular stimulation after tetralogy of Fallot repair: a multicenter study. Circulation. 2004;109:1994–2000.
 665. Khairy P , Harris L, Landzberg MJ, et al. Sudden death and defibrillators in transposition of the great arteries with intra-atrial baffles: a multicenter 
study. Circ Arrhythm Electrophysiol. 2008;1:250–7.
 666. Anpalahan M, Gibson S. The prevalence of neurally mediated syncope 
in older patients presenting with unexplained falls. Eur J Intern Med. 
2012;23:e48–e52.
 667. Richardson DA, Bexton RS, Shaw FE, et al. Prevalence of cardioinhibitory carotid sinus hypersensitivity in patients 50 years or over presenting to 
the accident and emergency department with “unexplained” or “recur -
rent” falls. Pacing Clin Electrophysiol. 1997;20:820–3.
 668. Paling D, Vilches-Moraga A, Akram Q, et al. Carotid sinus syndrome is common in very elderly patients undergoing tilt table testing and carotid sinus massage because of syncope or unexplained falls. Aging Clin Exp 
Res. 2011;23:304–8.
 669. Rafanelli M, Ruffolo E, Chisciotti VM, et al. Clinical aspects and diagnos-
tic relevance of neuroautonomic evaluation in patients with unexplained 
falls. Aging Clin Exp Res. 2014;26:33–7.
 670. Shaw FE, Kenny RA. The overlap between syncope and falls in the elderly. Postgrad Med J. 1997;73:635–9.
 671. Matthews IG, Tresham IA.E, Parry SW. Syncope in the older person. 
Cardiol Clin. 2015;33:411–21.
 672. Newton J, Kenny R. Syncope and falls in older people: defining the size of the problem. Expert Rev Pharmacoecon Outcomes Res. 2001;1:187–97.
 673. Duncan GW, Tan MP , Newton JL, et al. Vasovagal syncope in the older person: differences in presentation between older and younger patients. Age Ageing. 2010;39:465–70.
 674. O’Dwyer C, Bennett K, Langan Y, et al. Amnesia for loss of consciousness 
is common in vasovagal syncope. Europace. 2011;13:1040–5.
 675. Parry SW, Steen IN, Baptist M, et al. Amnesia for loss of consciousness in carotid sinus syndrome: implications for presentation with falls. J Am Coll 
Cardiol. 2005;45:1840–3.
 676. Lakatta EG, Levy D. Arterial and cardiac aging: major shareholders in 
cardiovascular disease enterprises: Part I: aging arteries: a “set up” for 
vascular disease. Circulation. 2003;107:139–46.
 677. Grubb BP , Karabin B. Syncope: evaluation and management in the geri-atric patient. Clin Geriatr Med. 2012;28:717–28.
 678. Esposito C, Dal Canton A. Functional changes in the aging kidney. J 
Nephrol. 2010;23 Suppl 15:S41–5.
 679. Racco F, Sconocchini C, Alesi C, et al. Long-term follow-up after syncope. A group of 183 patients observed for 5 years. Minerva Cardioangiol. 
2000;48:69–78.
 680. Kapoor WN, Hanusa BH. Is syncope a risk factor for poor outcomes? Comparison of patients with and without syncope. Am J Med. 1996;100:646–55.
 681. Ruwald MH, Hansen ML, Lamberts M, et al. Comparison of incidence, predictors, and the impact of co-morbidity and polypharmacy on the 
risk of recurrent syncope in patients <85 versus ≥85 years of age. Am J 
Cardiol. 2013;112:1610–15.
 682. Ungar A, Galizia G, Morrione A, et al. Two-year morbidity and mortality 
in elderly patients with syncope. Age Ageing. 2011;40:696–702.
 683. Forman DE, Rich MW, Alexander KP , et al. Cardiac care for older adults. Time for a new paradigm. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2011;57:1801–10.
 684. O’Mahony D, Foote C. Prospective evaluation of unexplained syncope, 
dizziness, and falls among community-dwelling elderly adults. J Gerontol 
A Biol Sci Med Sci. 1998;53:M435–M440.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on November 12, 2025

2017 ACC/AHA/HRS Syncope Guideline
Circulation. 2017;136:e60–e122. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000499 August 1, 2017
 e113
CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINES 685. Tan MP , Kenny RA. Cardiovascular assessment of falls in older people. 
Clin Interv Aging. 2006;1:57–66.
 686. Ryan DJ, Nick S, Colette SM, et al. Carotid sinus syndrome, should we pace? A multicentre, randomised control trial (Safepace 2). Heart. 
2010;96:347–51.
 687. Davies AJ, Kenny RA. Falls presenting to the accident and emergency department: types of presentation and risk factor profile. Age Ageing. 
1996;25:362–6.
 688. Cohen RA, Poppas A, Forman DE, et al. Vascular and cogni-
tive functions associated with cardiovascular disease in the elderly.  
J Clin Exp Neuropsychol. 2009;31:96–110.
 689. Vernooij MW, Ikram MA, Vrooman HA, et al. White matter microstructur -
al integrity and cognitive function in a general elderly population. Arch Gen Psychiatry. 2009;66:545–53.
 690. Vogels RLC, Oosterman JM, van Harten B, et al. Profile of cognitive im-
pairment in chronic heart failure. J Am Geriatr Soc. 2007;55:1764–70.
 691. Numé AK, Gislason G, Christiansen CB, et al. Syncope and mo-
tor vehicle crash risk: a Danish nationwide study. JAMA Intern Med. 2016;176:503–10.
 692. Simpson C, Dorian P , Gupta A, et al. Assessment of the cardiac patient 
for fitness to drive: drive subgroup executive summary. Can J Cardiol. 
2004;20:1314–20.
 693. Larsen GC, Stupey MR, Walance CG, et al. Recurrent cardiac events in 
survivors of ventricular fibrillation or tachycardia. Implications for driving 
restrictions. JAMA. 1994;271:1335–9.
 694. Tan VH, Ritchie D, Maxey C, et al. Prospective assessment of the 
risk of vasovagal syncope during driving. JACC Clin Electrophysiol. 2016;2:203–8.
 695. Blumenthal R, Braunstein J, Connolly H, et al. Cardiovascular Advisory Panel Guidelines for the medical examination of commerical motor ve-hicle drivers. Available at: https://www.fmcsa.dot.gov/sites/fmcsa.dot.gov/files/docs/cardio.pdf. Accessed January 10, 2017.
 696. Akiyama T, Powell JL, Mitchell LB, et al. Resumption of driving after life-threatening ventricular tachyarrhythmia. N Engl J Med. 2001;345:391–7.
 697. Maas R, Ventura R, Kretzschmar C, et al. Syncope, driving recommenda-tions, and clinical reality: survey of patients. BMJ. 2003;326:21
 698. Epstein AE, Miles WM, Benditt DG, et al. Personal and public safety is-sues related to arrhythmias that may affect consciousness: implications for regulation and physician recommendations. A medical/scientific statement from the American Heart Association and the North American Society of Pacing and Electrophysiology. Circulation. 1996;94:1147–66.
 699. Bänsch D, Brunn J, Castrucci M, et al. Syncope in patients with an im-plantable cardioverter-defibrillator: incidence, prediction and implica-tions for driving restrictions. J Am Coll Cardiol. 1998;31:608–15.
 700. Antonelli D, Peres D, Freedberg NA, et al. Incidence of postdischarge symptomatic paroxysmal atrial fibrillation in patients who under -
went coronary artery bypass graft: long-term follow-up. Pacing Clin Electrophysiol. 2004;27:365–7.
 701. Thijssen J, Borleffs CJ, van Rees JB, et al. Driving restrictions after implant-
able cardioverter defibrillator implantation: an evidence-based approach. 
Eur Heart J. 2011;32:2678–87.
 702. Vijgen J, Botto G, Camm J, et al. Consensus statement of the European Heart Rhythm Association: updated recommendations for driving 
by patients with implantable cardioverter defibrillators. Europace. 
2009;11:1097–107.
 703. Colivicchi F, Ammirati F, Santini M. Epidemiology and prognos-tic implications of syncope in young competing athletes. Eur Heart J. 
2004;25:1749–53.
 704. Maron BJ, Udelson JE, Bonow RO, et al. Eligibility and disqualification 
recommendations for competitive athletes with cardiovascular abnor -
malities: Task Force 3: hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, arrhythmogenic 
right ventricular cardiomyopathy and other cardiomyopathies, and myo-
carditis: a scientific statement from the American Heart Association and 
American College of Cardiology. Circulation. 2015;132:e273–80.
 705. Link MS, Mark Estes NA. Sudden cardiac death in athletes. Prog 
Cardiovasc Dis. 2008;51:44–57.
 706. Pelliccia A, Zipes DP , Maron BJ. Bethesda Conference #36 and the 
European Society of Cardiology Consensus Recommendations revisited a comparison of U.S. and European criteria for eligibility and disqualifica-tion of competitive athletes with cardiovascular abnormalities. J Am Coll 
Cardiol. 2008;52:1990–6.
 707. Zipes DP , Link MS, Ackerman MJ, et al. Eligibility and disqualifica-
tion recommendations for competitive athletes with cardiovascular abnormalities: Task Force 9: arrhythmias and conduction defects: a sci-
entific statement from the American Heart Association and American 
College of Cardiology. Circulation. 2015;132:e315–e325.
 708. Albert RK, Schuller JL, Network CCR. Macrolide antibiotics and the 
risk of cardiac arrhythmias. Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 2014;189:  
1173–80.
 709. Hastings JL, Levine BD. Syncope in the athletic patient. Prog Cardiovasc 
Dis. 2012;54:438–44.
 710. O’Connor FG, Levine BD, Childress MA, et al. Practical management: 
a systematic approach to the evaluation of exercise-related syncope in 
athletes. Clin J Sport Med. 2009;19:429–34.
 711. Murrell C, Cotter JD, George K, et al. Influence of age on syncope fol-lowing prolonged exercise: differential responses but similar orthostatic 
intolerance. J Physiol (Lond). 2009;587:5959–69.
 712. Vettor G, Zorzi A, Basso C, et al. Syncope as a warning symptom of sud-
den cardiac death in athletes. Cardiol Clin. 2015;33:423–32.
 713. Asplund CA, O’Connor FG, Noakes TD. Exercise-associated collapse: an evidence-based review and primer for clinicians. Br J Sports Med. 2011;45:1157–62.
 714. O’Connor FG, Levine B. Syncope in athletes of cardiac origin: 2B. From 
personal history and physical examination sections. Curr Sports Med Rep. 
2015;14:254–6.
 715. Elliott PM, Anastasakis A, Borger MA, et al. 2014 ESC Guidelines on di-
agnosis and management of hypertrophic cardiomyopathy: the Task Force 
for the Diagnosis and Management of Hypertrophic Cardiomyopathy of the European Society of Cardiology (ESC). Eur Heart J. 2014;35:  
2733–79.
 716. Zaidi A, Sheikh N, Jongman JK, et al. Clinical differentiation between 
physiological remodeling and arrhythmogenic right ventricular cardio-
myopathy in athletes with marked electrocardiographic repolarization 
anomalies. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2015;65:2702–11.
 717. The European Society of Cardiology guidelines for the diagnosis and 
management of syncope. Eur Heart J. 2009;30:2539–40.
 718. Paisey JR, Yue AM, Treacher K, et al. Implantable loop recorders detect tachyarrhythmias in symptomatic patients with negative electrophysi-
ological studies. Int J Cardiol. 2005;98:35–8.
 719. Christou GA, Kouidi EJ, Anifanti MA, et al. A novel strategy for evalu-ating tilt test in athletes with syncope. Eur J Prev Cardiol. 2016;23:  
1003–10.
 720. Walsh JAr, Topol EJ, Steinhubl SR. Novel wireless devices for cardiac mon-itoring. Circulation. 2014;130:573–81.
 721. Maron BJ, Doerer JJ, Haas TS, et al. Sudden deaths in young competi-tive athletes: analysis of 1866 deaths in the United States, 1980–2006. 
Circulation. 2009;119:1085–92.
 722. Maron BJ, Spirito P , Shen WK, et al. Implantable cardioverter-defibrillators 
and prevention of sudden cardiac death in hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. JAMA. 2007;298:405–12.
 723. Corrado D, Basso C, Pavei A, et al. Trends in sudden cardiovascular death 
in young competitive athletes after implementation of a preparticipation 
screening program. JAMA. 2006;296:1593–601.
 724. James CA, Bhonsale A, Tichnell C, et al. Exercise increases age-related penetrance and arrhythmic risk in arrhythmogenic right ventricular dys-plasia/cardiomyopathy-associated desmosomal mutation carriers. J Am 
Coll Cardiol. 2013;62:1290–7.
 725. Anderson JB, Czosek RJ, Knilans TK, et al. The effect of paediatric 
syncope on health-related quality of life. Cardiol Young. 2012;22:  
583–8.
 726. Barón-Esquivias G, Gómez S, Aguilera A, et al. Short-term evolution of vasovagal syncope: influence on the quality of life. Int J Cardiol. 
2005;102:315–9.
 727. Giada F, Silvestri I, Rossillo A, et al. Psychiatric profile, quality of life and 
risk of syncopal recurrence in patients with tilt-induced vasovagal syn-
cope. Europace. 2005;7:465–71.
 728. Linzer M, Pontinen M, Gold DT, et al. Impairment of physical and psy-
chosocial function in recurrent syncope. J Clin Epidemiol. 1991;44:  
1037–43.
 729. Romme JJCM, Reitsma JB, Go-Schön IK, et al. Prospective evaluation of non-pharmacological treatment in vasovagal syncope. Europace. 2010;12:567–73.
 730. Rose MS, Koshman ML, Ritchie D, et al. The development and prelimi-nary validation of a scale measuring the impact of syncope on quality of life. Europace. 2009;11:1369–74.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on November 12, 2025

Shen et al
August 1, 2017 Circulation. 2017;136:e60–e122. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000499
 e114 731. Santhouse J, Carrier C, Arya S, et al. A comparison of self-reported qual-
ity of life between patients with epilepsy and neurocardiogenic syncope. 
Epilepsia. 2007;48:1019–22.
 732. van Dijk N, Sprangers MA, Colman N, et al. Clinical factors associat-ed with quality of life in patients with transient loss of consciousness.  
J Cardiovasc Electrophysiol. 2006;17:998–1003.
 733. van DN, Sprangers MA, Boer KR, et al. Quality of life within one year fol-
lowing presentation after transient loss of consciousness. Am J Cardiol. 2007;100:672–6.
 734. Faddis MN, Rich MW. Pacing interventions for falls and syncope in the elderly. Clin Geriatr Med. 2002;18:279–94. 735. Finkler SA. The distinction between cost and charges. Ann Intern Med. 1982;96:102–9.
 736. Sun BC, Emond JA, Camargo CA Jr, Direct medical costs of syncope-related hospitalizations in the United States. Am J Cardiol. 2005;95: 
668–71.
 737. Farwell DJ, Sulke AN. Does the use of a syncope diagnostic protocol im-prove the investigation and management of syncope? Heart. 2004;90:  
52–8.
 738. Barón-Esquivias G, Moreno SG, Martínez A, et al. Cost of diagnosis and treatment of syncope in patients admitted to a cardiology unit. Europace. 
2006;8:122–7.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on November 12, 2025

2017 ACC/AHA/HRS Syncope Guideline
Circulation. 2017;136:e60–e122. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000499 August 1, 2017
 e115
CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINESAppendix 1. Author Relationships With Industry and Other Entities (Relevant)—2017 ACC/AHA/HRS Guideline for 
the Evaluation and Management of Patients With Syncope (March 2015)
Committee 
Member Employment ConsultantSpeakers 
BureauOwnership/
Partnership/
PrincipalPersonal  
ResearchInstitutional, 
Organizational, 
or Other 
Financial 
BenefitExpert  
WitnessVoting 
Recusals by 
Section*
Win-Kuang 
Shen, ChairMayo Clinic Arizona—Professor of Medicine; 
Mayo Clinic College 
of Medicine—Chair, 
Department of Cardiovascular DiseasesNone None None None None None None
Robert S. 
Sheldon, Vice 
ChairUniversity of Calgary, 
Department of Medicine—
ProfessorNone None None None None None None
David G. BendittUniversity of Minnesota Medical School, 
Cardiovascular Division—
Professor of Medicine•  Medtronic†
•  St. Jude 
Medical†None None None None None 3.2, 3.2.3, 
3.2.5, 
4.1.1–4.1.3, 
4.2.1–4.2.5, 4.3.1–4.3.5, 
5.1–5.3, 10.1, 
10.2, 10.3, 
10.5, 12
Mitchell I. 
CohenUniversity of Arizona School of Medicine-
Phoenix—Clinical Professor 
of Child Health; Phoenix 
Children’s Heart Center—
Co-Director; Phoenix 
Children’s Hospital, 
Pediatric Cardiology—ChiefNone None None None None None None
Daniel E. FormanUniversity of Pittsburgh—Professor 
of Medicine; University 
of Pittsburgh Medical Center—Chair, Geriatric 
Cardiology Section; VA 
Pittsburg Healthcare 
Systems—Director, Cardiac 
RehabilitationNone None None None None None None
Roy Freeman‡ Harvard Medical School—Professor of Neurology; 
Beth Israel Deaconess 
Medical Center, Center for 
Autonomic and Peripheral 
Nerve Disorders—Director• Lundbeck† None None None None None 4.3.1–4.3.5, 5.1, 6.1, 10.1, 
10.3, 10.5, 12
Zachary D. GoldbergerUniversity of Washington School of Medicine, 
Harborview Medical 
Center Division of 
Cardiology—Assistant Professor of MedicineNone None None None None None None
Blair P . Grubb University of Toledo Medical Center, Medicine and Pediatrics—Professor• Biotronik• MedtronicNone None None None None 3.2, 3.2.3, 3.2.5, 4.1.1–4.1.3, 
4.2.1–4.2.5, 
4.3.1–4.3.5, 
5.1–5.3, 10.1, 
10.2, 10.3, 
10.5, 12
Mohamed H. HamdanUniversity of Wisconsin School of Medicine, 
Cardiovascular Medicine—
Professor and Chief of 
Cardiovascular MedicineNone None •  F2 Solutions None None None 2.3.3, 2.3.4, 
12
(Continued )
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on November 12, 2025

Shen et al
August 1, 2017 Circulation. 2017;136:e60–e122. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000499 e116
Andrew D. 
KrahnThe University of British Columbia, Division of 
Cardiology—Professor 
of Medicine and Head of 
Division• Medtronic None None None •  Boston 
Scientific†
• Medtronic†None 3.2, 3.2.3, 3.2.5, 
4.1.1–4.1.3, 
4.2.1–4.2.5, 
4.3.1–4.3.5, 
5.1–5.3, 10.1, 
10.2, 10.3, 
10.5, 12
Mark S. Link University of Texas Southwestern Medical 
Center, Department of 
Medicine, Division of 
Cardiology—Director, 
Cardiac Electrophysiology; Professor of MedicineNone None None None None None None
Brian Olshansky University of Iowa Carver College of Medicine, 
Cardiovascular Medicine—
Emeritus Professor of 
Internal Medicine; Mercy 
Hospital North Iowa—
Electrophysiologist• Lundbeck† None None None None None None
Satish R. Raj University of Calgary, Cardiac Sciences—
Associate Professor• GE Healthcare
• Lundbeck†None None • Medtronic None None 2.3.2, 2.3.4, 3.2–3.2.5, 
3.3.2, 
4.1.1–4.1.3, 
4.2.1–4.2.5, 
4.3.1–4.3.5, 
5.1–5.3, 6.1, 7, 10.1–10.3, 
10.5, 12
Roopinder Kaur 
SandhuUniversity of Alberta, Medical Division of 
Cardiology—Assistant 
Professor of MedicineNone None None None None None None
Dan Sorajja Mayo Clinic Arizona, Cardiovascular Diseases—Assistant Professor of 
MedicineNone None None None None None None
Benjamin C. SunOregon Health & Science University—Associate 
ProfessorNone None None None None None None
Clyde W. Yancy Northwestern University 
Feinberg School of Medicine, 
Division of Cardiology—Professor of Medicine and 
Chief; Diversity & Inclusion—
Vice DeanNone None None None None None None
This table represents the relationships of committee members with industry and other entities that were determined to be relevant to this document. These 
relationships were reviewed and updated in conjunction with all meetings and/or conference calls of the writing committee during the document development process. The table does not necessarily reflect relationships with industry at the time of publication. A person is deemed to have a significant interest in a business if the interest represents ownership of ≥5% of the voting stock or share of the business entity, or ownership of ≥$5000 of the fair market value of the business 
entity; or if funds received by the person from the business entity exceed 5% of the person’s gross income for the previous year. Relationships that exist with no 
financial benefit are also included for the purpose of transparency. Relationships in this table are modest unless otherwise noted.
According to the ACC/AHA, a person has a relevant relationship IF: a) the relationship or interest relates to the same or similar subject matter, intellectual 
property or asset, topic, or issue addressed in the document; or b) the company/entity (with whom the relationship exists) makes a drug, drug class, or device 
addressed in the document, or makes a competing drug or device addressed in the document; or c) the person or a member of the person’s household, has a 
reasonable potential for financial, professional or other personal gain or loss as a result of the issues/content addressed in the document.
*Writing committee members are required to recuse themselves from voting on sections to which their specific relationships with industry and other entities may apply.
†Significant relationship.
‡Dr. Roy Freeman, the official representative of the American Academy of Neurology, resigned from the writing committee in November 2016, before the final 
balloting process; recusals noted are from the initial round of balloting. We thank him for his contributions.
ACC indicates American College of Cardiology; AHA, American Heart Association; HRS, Heart Rhythm Society; and VA, Veterans Affairs.Appendix 1. Continued
Committee Member Employment ConsultantSpeakers 
BureauOwnership/
Partnership/
PrincipalPersonal  
ResearchInstitutional, 
Organizational, 
or Other 
Financial 
BenefitExpert  
WitnessVoting 
Recusals by 
Section*
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on November 12, 2025

2017 ACC/AHA/HRS Syncope Guideline
Circulation. 2017;136:e60–e122. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000499 August 1, 2017
 e117
CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINESAppendix 2. Reviewer Relationships With Industry and Other Entities (Comprehensive)—2017 ACC/AHA/HRS 
Guideline for the Evaluation and Management of Patients With Syncope (June 2016)
Reviewer Representation Employment ConsultantSpeakers  
BureauOwnership/
Partnership/
Principal Personal ResearchInstitutional, 
Organizational, 
or Other 
Financial 
BenefitExpert 
Witness
Italo Biaggioni Official  
Reviewer—
AHAVanderbilt 
University School 
of Medicine—Professor of Medicine• Lundbeck*
•  Shire 
Pharmaceuticals*
• Theravance*None None •  Astellas Pharma 
(DSMB)
•  AstraZeneca*
•  Forest 
Pharmaceuticals*
•  Janssen 
Pharmaceu­ ticals 
(DSMB)
• Lundbeck*
• Theravance*None None
Joaquin E. CigarroaOfficial Reviewer—ACC/AHA Task Force 
on Clinical 
Practice GuidelinesOregon Health & Science University—Clinical Professor 
of MedicineNone None None None • NIH†
• AHA†• SCAI†• ASA†
•  Catheterization 
and Cardiovascular Intervention†None
Kenneth A. 
EllenbogenOfficial  Reviewer—
AHAVCU Medical 
Center—Director, 
Clinical EP Laboratory• AHA
• Atricure*
•  Biosense Webster*
• Biotronik*
• Boston Science*
• HRS*•  Janssen Pharmaceuticals
• Medtronic*• Pfizer*• Sentra Heart•  St. Jude Medical*None None • Atricure*
• Boston Science
• Biosense Webster• Daiichi-Sankyo*•  Medtronic 
(DSMB)
• Medtronic
• NIH• Sanofi-aventis• AHA
•  American  
Heart Journal
•  Biosense 
Webster*
•  Boston Science*
• HRS• JCE
• Medtronic*
• PACE• Sanofi-aventis•  Defendant, 
Catheter 
ablation complication, 2015
•  Plantiff, Lead extraction complication, 2015
Rakesh GopinathannairOfficial  Reviewer—HRSUniversity of Louisville School of Medicine and Jewish Hospital 
Division of 
Cardiovascular Medicine—Associate  
Professor of 
Medicine, Director of Cardiac EP•  Boston Scientific
• Health Trust PG•  St. Jude 
Medical*• AHA
•  Bristol-Myers Squibb
• Pfizer*
• Zoll MedicalNone None None None
Robert Helm Official  
Reviewer—
HRSBoston University 
School of 
Medicine—
Assistant Professor of Medicine, 
Assistant 
Professor of RadiologyNone None None None •  Boston Scientific
•  St. Jude MedicalNone
Dhanunjaya 
LakkireddyOfficial Reviewer—
ACC Board of GovernorsUniversity of 
Kansas Medical 
Center—Professor of Medicine; Center for Excellence in AF 
and Complex 
Arrhythmias—Director•  Biosense 
Webster
• St. Jude Medical•  Boehringer Ingelheim
•  Bristol-Myers 
Squibb
•  Janssen Pharmaceuticals
• PfizerNone None None None
Thad Waites Official 
Reviewer—
ACC Board of TrusteesForrest General 
Hospital—Director 
of Catheterization LaboratoryNone None None None None None
(Continued )
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on November 12, 2025

Shen et al
August 1, 2017 Circulation. 2017;136:e60–e122. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000499 e118
Christopher 
GibbonsOrganizational Reviewer—AANBeth Israel Deaconess Medical Center 
Neuropathy 
Clinic—Director• Lundbeck None None •  Astellas Pharma (DSMB)
•  Janssen 
Pharmaceu­ ticals 
(DSMB)None None
Kaushal H. 
ShahOrganizational Reviewer—
ACEP/SAEMThe Mount 
Sinai Hospital—
Associate 
Professor of Emergency MedicineNone None None None None None
Mike Silka Organizational 
Reviewer—
PACESChildren’s Hospital 
Los Angeles—
Professor of Pediatrics, CardiologyNone None None None None •  Defendant, 
SCD in CPVT 
patient, 2016
Sana M. Al-KhatibContent Reviewer—ACC/AHA 
Task Force 
on Clinical Practice GuidelinesDuke Clinical Research Institute—
Professor of 
MedicineNone None None • FDA*• NHLBI*• PCORI*
•  VA Health  
System (DSMB)• Elsevier*• AHANone
Kim K. Birtcher Content Reviewer—
ACC/AHA 
Task Force on Clinical Practice GuidelinesUniversity of Houston College 
of Pharmacy—
Clinical Professor•  Jones & Bartlett LearningNone None None None None
Michele BrignoleContent ReviewerArrhythmologic Centre, Ospedali 
del Tigullio—Head 
of CardiologyNone None • F2 Solutions† None None None
Hugh Calkins Content Reviewer—ACC EP Section Leadership 
CouncilJohns Hopkins 
Hospital—Professor of Medicine, Director of EP• Abbott• Atricure•  Boehringer Ingelheim*
• Medtronic*None None •  Boehringer Ingelheim†
•  St. Jude Medical*•  Abbott  
Laboratories•  Defendant, SCD, 2015
Coletta Barrett Content Reviewer—Lay ReviewerOur Lady of the Lake Regional Medical Center—
Vice PresidentNone None None None None None
Lin Yee Chen Content 
ReviewerUniversity of Minnesota 
Medical 
School—Associate Professor of MedicineNone None None None • NIH* None
Andrew EpsteinContent ReviewerUniversity of Pennsylvania Hospital and 
the Veteran’s 
Administration Medical Center—Professor of 
MedicineNone None None •  Biosense  
Webster*
• Biotronik*•  Boston Scientific* 
(DSMB)
•  Boston Scientific*
• C.R. Bard*
•  Medtronic 
(DSMB)
• Medtronic*•  St. Jude Medical* 
(DSMB)
• St. Jude MedicalNone NoneAppendix 2. Continued
Reviewer Representation Employment ConsultantSpeakers  
BureauOwnership/
Partnership/
Principal Personal ResearchInstitutional, 
Organizational, 
or Other 
Financial 
BenefitExpert 
Witness
(Continued )
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on November 12, 2025

2017 ACC/AHA/HRS Syncope Guideline
Circulation. 2017;136:e60–e122. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000499 August 1, 2017
 e119
CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINESSusan 
EtheridgeContent Reviewer—ACC EP 
Section 
Leadership CouncilUniversity of Utah—Training Program DirectorNone None None •  SADS Foundation
• PACES†• Up-to-Date† None
Marci 
Farquhar-SnowContent ReviewerMayo Clinic School of Health 
Sciences—Program Director, Cardiology Nurse 
Practitioner, 
FellowshipNone None None None None None
Samuel S. GiddingContent Reviewer—ACC/AHA 
Task Force on 
Clinical Practice GuidelinesNemours/Alfred I. duPont Hospital for Children—
Chief, Division 
of Pediatric Cardiology•  FH Foundation† International
• FH Foundation†None None • FH Foundation†• NIH*None None
Bulent GorenekContent Reviewer—ACC EP Section 
Leadership 
CouncilEskisehir Osmangazi University Cardiology 
Department—
ChairNone None None None None None
Paul LeLorier Content Reviewer—ACC Heart Failure and Transplant 
Section 
Leadership CouncilLSU Health Sciences Center—Associate Professor of Medicine and 
Neurology; EP 
Service—DirectorNone None None • Medtronic* • Medtronic* None
Patrick McBrideContent ReviewerUniversity of Wisconsin School of Medicine & 
Public Health—
Professor of Medicine and Family Medicine; Dean for Faculty 
Affairs—
Associate; Prevention Cardiology—
Associate DirectorNone None None None None None
Carlos Morillo Content ReviewerCumming School of Medicine—
Professor Department of Cardiac Sciences; University of 
Calgary—Section 
Chief Division of Cardiology, Libin Cardiovascular 
Institute•  Bayer HealthCare
•  Boehringer 
Ingelheim
•  Boston ScientificNone None •  Biosense Webster
•  Canadian Institutes of Health Research†
• Medtronic†• Merck
• Pfizer
•  St. Jude Medical• Biotronik
• PfizerNone
Rick Nishimura Content 
ReviewerMayo Clinic Division of Cardiovascular Disease—
Professor of 
MedicineNone None None None None NoneAppendix 2. Continued
Reviewer Representation Employment ConsultantSpeakers  
BureauOwnership/
Partnership/
Principal Personal ResearchInstitutional, 
Organizational, 
or Other 
Financial 
BenefitExpert 
Witness
(Continued )
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on November 12, 2025

Shen et al
August 1, 2017 Circulation. 2017;136:e60–e122. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000499 e120
Richard Page Content 
ReviewerUniversity of Wisconsin School of Medicine & 
Public Health—
Chair, Department of MedicineNone None None None • FDA None
Antonio 
RavieleContent ReviewerAlliance to Fight Atrial 
Fibrillation—President; Venice Arrhythmias—
PresidentNone None None None None None
Marwan 
RefaatContent Reviewer—ACC EP 
Section 
Leadership CouncilAmerican University of Beirut—Faculty 
of Medicine and 
Medical CenterNone None None None None None
Melissa RobinsonContent ReviewerUniversity of Washington—Assistant Professor of 
Medicine; 
Director, Ventricular Arrhythmia 
Program• Medtronic* None None None None None
Paola Sandroni Content ReviewerMayo Clinic—Professor of 
Neurology, Practice Chair of NeurologyNone None None None None None
Colette Seifer Content ReviewerUniversity of Manitoba—Associate Professor, Section 
of CardiologyNone None None None None None
Monica SolbiatiContent ReviewerFondazione IRCCS CA’ 
Granda, Ospedale Maggiore Policlinico, 
Milano—Senior 
PhysicianNone None None None None None
Richard Sutton Content ReviewerNational Heart and Lung Institute, Imperial College London—Emeritus Professor• Medtronic* •  St. Jude Medical*•  Boston  
Scientific*
•  Edwards Lifesciences*
•  Shire  
Pharmaceuticals
• AstraZeneca• Medtronic* None •  Defendant, Fatal car accident caused by V VS patient, 
3 trials in 
2016*
Gaurav UpadhyayContent Reviewer—ACC EP Section 
Leadership 
CouncilUniversity of Chicago—Assistant Professor of 
Medicine•  Biosense 
Webster
• Biotronik• Boston Scientific
• Medtronic
• St. Jude Medical• Zoll MedicalNone None •  Biosense Webster
• Biotronik*• Medtronic*None NoneAppendix 2. Continued
Reviewer Representation Employment ConsultantSpeakers  
BureauOwnership/
Partnership/
Principal Personal ResearchInstitutional, 
Organizational, 
or Other 
Financial 
BenefitExpert 
Witness
(Continued )
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on November 12, 2025

2017 ACC/AHA/HRS Syncope Guideline
Circulation. 2017;136:e60–e122. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000499 August 1, 2017
 e121
CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINESPaul Varosy Content 
ReviewerUniversity of Colorado Hospital, 
Clinical Cardiac 
EP Training program—Associate Program 
Director; VA 
Eastern Colorado Healthcare System—Director 
of Cardiovascular 
EPNone None None • AHA†•  VA Office of Health Services 
Research and 
Development (PI)*None None
This table represents the relationships of reviewers with industry and other entities that were disclosed at the time of peer review, including those not deemed to be relevant 
to this document, at the time this document was under review. The table does not necessarily reflect relationships with industry at the time of publication. A person is deemed 
to have a significant interest in a business if the interest represents ownership of ≥5% of the voting stock or share of the business entity, or ownership of ≥$5000 of the fair 
market value of the business entity; or if funds received by the person from the business entity exceed 5% of the person’s gross income for the previous year. Relationships that exist with no financial benefit are also included for the purpose of transparency. Relationships in this table are modest unless otherwise noted. Names are listed in alphabetical order within each category of review. Please refer to http://www.acc.org/guidelines/about-guidelines-and-clinical-documents/relationships-with-industry-policy for definitions of 
disclosure categories or additional information about the ACC/AHA Disclosure Policy for Writing Committees.
*Significant relationship.
†No financial benefit.AAN indicates American Academy of Neurology; ACC; American College of Cardiology; ACEP , American College of Emergency Physicians; AHA, American Heart 
Association; ASA, American Stroke Association; DSMB, data safety monitoring board; CPVT, catecholaminergic polymorphic ventricular tachycardia; EP , electrophysiology; FDA, 
US Food and Drug Administration; FH, familial hypercholesterolemia; HRS, Heart Rhythm Society; ICD, implantable cardioverter-defibrillator; JCE, Journal of Cardiovascular 
Electrophysiology; LSU, Louisiana State University; NHLBI, National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute; PACE, Partners in Advanced Cardiac Evaluation; PACES, Pediatric and Congenital Electrophysiology Society; PCORI, Patient-Centered Outcomes Research Institute; PI, principal investigator; SADS, Sudden Arrhythmia Death Syndromes Foundation; SAEM, Society for Academic Emergency Medicine; SCAI, Society for Cardiovascular Angiography and Interventions; SCD, sudden cardiac death; VA, Veterans Affairs; VCU, 
Virginia Commonwealth University; and V VS, vasovagal syncope.Appendix 2. Continued
Reviewer Representation Employment ConsultantSpeakers  
BureauOwnership/
Partnership/
Principal Personal ResearchInstitutional, 
Organizational, 
or Other 
Financial 
BenefitExpert 
Witness
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on November 12, 2025

Shen et al
August 1, 2017 Circulation. 2017;136:e60–e122. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000499
 e122Appendix 3. Abbreviations
ACHD = adult congenital heart disease
ARVC = arrhythmogenic right ventricular cardiomyopathy
AV = atrioventricular
CHD = congenital heart disease
CPVT = catecholaminergic polymorphic ventricular tachycardia
CT = computed tomographyECG = electrocardiogram/electrocardiographicED = emergency departmentEEG = electroencephalogram/electroencephalography
EPS = electrophysiological study
GDMT = guideline-directed management and therapy
HCM = hypertrophic cardiomyopathy
HF = heart failureICD = implantable cardioverter-defibrillatorICM = implantable cardiac monitorLCSD = left cardiac sympathetic denervationLQTS = long-QT syndrome
LV = left ventricular
MRI = magnetic resonance imagingOH = orthostatic hypotensionQoL= quality of lifeRCT = randomized controlled trialPOTS = postural tachycardia syndrome
SCD = sudden cardiac death
SVT = supraventricular tachycardiaVA = ventricular arrhythmiaVF = ventricular fibrillationVT = ventricular tachycardiaV VS = vasovagal syncope
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on November 12, 2025

