IDSA GUIDELINES
International Clinical Practice Guidelines for the
Treatment of Acute Uncomplicated Cystitis and
Pyelonephritis in Women: A 2010 Update by the
Infectious Diseases Society of America and theEuropean Society for Microbiology andInfectious Diseases
Kalpana Gupta,1Thomas M. Hooton,2Kurt G. Naber,9Bjo¨rn Wullt,10Richard Colgan,3Loren G. Miller,4
Gregory J. Moran,5Lindsay E. Nicolle,8Raul Raz,11Anthony J. Schaeffer,6and David E. Soper7
1Department of Medicine, Veterans Affairs Boston Health Care System and Boston University School of Medicine, Boston, Massachusetts;2Department of
Medicine, University of Miami Miller School of Medicine, University of Miami, Miami Florida;3Department of Family and Community Medicine, University
of Maryland, Baltimore, Maryland,4Division of Infectious Diseases, Har bor-UCLA Medical Center, Torrance, and5Department of Emergency Medicine and
Division of Infectious Diseases Olive Vie w-UCLA Medical Center, Slymar, California;6Deptartment of urology, Northwestern University, Chicago, Illinois; and
7Departments of Obstetrics and Gynecology and Medicine, Medical U niversity of South Carolina, Charleston, South Carolina;8Department of Internal
Medicine and Department of Medical Mirobiol ogy University of Manitoba, Winnipeg, Canada;9Technical University of Munich, Munich, Germany;10Lund
University Hospital, Lund, Sweden; and11Infectious Diseases Unit, Ha'Emek Medical Center, Afula , and Rappaport Faculty of Medicine, Technion, Haifa, Israel
A Panel of International Experts was convened by the Infectious Diseases Society of America (IDSA) in
collaboration with the European Society for Microbiology and Infectious Diseases (ESCMID) to update the1999 Uncomplicated Urinary Tract Infection Guidelines by the IDSA. Co-sponsoring organizations include theAmerican Congress of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, American Urological Association, Association ofMedical Microbiology and Infectious Diseases–Canada, and the Society for Academic Emergency Medicine.The focus of this work is treatment of women with acute uncomplicated cystitis and pyelonephritis, diagnoses
limited in these guidelines to premenopausal, non-pregnant women with no known urological abnormalities
or co-morbidities. The issues of in vitro resistance prevalence and the ecological adverse effects ofantimicrobial therapy (collateral damage) were considered as important factors in making optimal treatmentchoices and thus are reﬂected in the rankings of recommendations.
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
BACKGROUND
Acute uncomplicated cystitis remains one of the most
common indications for prescribing of antimicrobials tootherwise healthy community-dwelling women. Despitepublished guidelines for the optimal selection of an
antimicrobial agent and duration of therapy, studies
demonstrate a wide variation in prescribing practices[1–6]. The Infectious Diseases Society of America (ID-SA) published a clinical practice guideline on thetreatment of women with acute uncomplicated cystitisand pyelonephritis in 1999 [1]. Since then, antimicrobialresistance among uropathogens causing uncomplicatedcystitis has increased, appreciation of the importance ofReceived 10 December 2010; accepted 17 December 2010.
The process for evaluating the evidence was based on the IDSA Handbook on
Clinical Practice Guideline Development and involved a systematic weighting ofthe quality of the evidence and the grade of recommendation (Table 1) [31]
It is important to realize that guidelines cannot always account for individual
variation among patients. They are not intended to supplant physician judgmentwith respect to particular patients or special clinical situations. The IDSA considersadherence to these guidelines to be voluntary, with the ultimate determinationregarding their application to be made by the physician in the light of eachpatient's individual circumstances.
Correspondence: Kalpana Gupta, MD, VA Boston HCS, 1400 VFW Pkwy, 111
Med, West Roxbury, MA 02132 (kalpana.gupta@va.gov).
Clinical Infectious Diseases 2011;52(5):e103–e120
/C211The Author 2011. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the
Infectious Diseases Society of America. All rights reserved. For Permissions,please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com.1058-4838/2011/525-0001$37.00DOI: 10.1093/cid/ciq257
Clinical Practice Guidelines dCID 2011:52 (1 March) de103Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article/52/5/e103/388285 by MUSC Library user on 12 November 2025

the ecological adverse effects of antimicrobial therapy (collateral
damage) has increased, newer agents and different durations oftherapy have been studied, and clinical outcomes have in-creasingly been reported. In addition, women with uropath-ogens resistant to the treatment drug have been included insome studies, allowing for estimations of expected response ratesin a ‘‘real-life’’ clinical setting in which empirical therapy isprescribed either without a urine culture and susceptibilitytesting or before such results are known. In light of these de-velopments, an update of the guidelines was warranted.
The focus of this guideline is t reatment of women with acute
uncomplicated cystitis and pyelonephritis, diagnoses limited
in these guidelines to premenopausal, nonpregnant womenwith no known urological abnormalities or comorbidities. Itshould be noted that women who are postmenopausal or havewell-controlled diabetes without urological sequelae may beconsidered by some experts to have uncomplicated urinary
tract infection (UTI), but a discussion of speciﬁc managementof these groups is outside the scope of this guideline. In ad-dition, management of recurrent cystitis and of UTI inpregnant women, prevention of UTI, and diagnosis of UTI areall important issues that are not addressed in this guideline.The issues of in vitro resistance prevalence and the potentialfor collateral damage were considered as important factors inmaking optimal treatment choices and thus are reﬂected inthe rankings of recommendations.
Summarized below are the recommendations made in the
2010 guideline update. The Panel followed a process used in the
development of other IDSA guidelines which included a sys-tematic weighting of the quality of the evidence and the grade ofrecommendation [32] (Table 1). A detailed description of themethods, background, and evidence summaries that supportPrescribe a recommended antimicrobial Consider alternate diagnosis (such 
as pyelonephritis or complicated 
UTI) & treat accordingly 
(see text)
Yes Woman with acute uncomplicated cystitis 
Absence of fever, flank pain, or other suspicion for pyelonephritis 
Able to take oral medication No
Fluoroquinolones 
(resistance prevalence high in 
some areas) 
OR 
-lactams  
(avoid ampicillin or amoxicillin 
alone; lower efficacy than other 
available agents; requires close 
follow-up) NoCan one of the recommended antimicrobials * 
below be used considering: 
Availability 
Allergy history 
Tolerance 
Nitrofurantoin monohydrate/macrocrystals 100 
mg bid X 5 days 
(avoid if early pyelonephritis suspected) 
OR 
Trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole 160/800 mg 
(one DS tablet) bid X 3 days 
(avoid if resistance prevalence is known to 
exceed 20    or if used for UTI in previous 3 
months) 
OR 
Fosfomycin trometamol 3 gm single dose 
(lower efficacy than some other recommended 
agents; avoid if early pyelonephritis suspected) 
OR  
Pivmecillinam 400 mg bid x 5 days 
(lower efficacy than some other recommended 
agents; avoid if early pyelonephritis suspected) 
Yes *The choice between these agents should be 
individualized and based on patient allergy and 
compliance history, local practice patterns, local 
community resistance prevalence, availability, cost, and 
patient and provider threshold for failure (see Table 4) 
Figure 1. Approach to choosing an optimal antimicrobial agent for empirical treatment of acute uncomplicated cystitis. DS, double-strength; UTI,
urinary tract infection.
e104 dCID 2011:52 (1 March) dGupta et alDownloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article/52/5/e103/388285 by MUSC Library user on 12 November 2025

each of the recommendations can be found in the full text of the
guideline.
I.What Is the Optimal Treatment for Acute Uncomplicated
Cystitis?
Recommendations (Figure 1).
1. Nitrofurantoin monohydrate/macrocrystals (100 mg twice
daily for 5 days) is an appropriate choice for therapy due to
minimal resistance and propensity for collateral damage
(deﬁned above) and efﬁcacy comparable to 3 days oftrimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole (A-I).
2. Trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole (160/800 mg [1 double-
strength tablet] twice-daily for 3 days) is an appropriate choice
for therapy, given its efﬁcacy as assessed in numerous clinical
trials, if local resistance rates of uropathogens causing acute
uncomplicated cystitis do not exceed 20% or if the infecting
strain is known to be susceptible (A-I).
i. The threshold of 20% as the resistance prevalence at which
the agent is no longer recommended for empirical treatment of
acute cystitis is based on expert opinion derived from clinical,in vitro, and mathematical modeling studies (B-III).
ii. In some countries and regions, trimethoprim (100 mg twice
daily for 3 days) is the preferred agent and is considered
equivalent to trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole on the basis of
data presented in the original guideline (A-III) [1].
iii. Data are insufﬁcient to make a recommendation for
o t h e rc y s t i t i sa n t i m i c r o b i a l sa st ow h a tr e s i s t a n c ep r e v a l e n c e
should be used to preclude their use for empirical treatment of
acute cystitis.
3. Fosfomycin trometamol (3 g in a single dose) is an
appropriate choice for therapy where it is available due to
minimal resistance and propensity for collateral damage, but it
appears to have inferior efﬁcacy compared with standard short-
course regimens according to data submitted to the US Food
and Drug Administration (FDA) and summarized in the
Medical Letter (A-I) [7].
4. Pivmecillinam (400 mg bid for 3–7 days) is an
appropriate choice for therapy in regions where it is available
(availability limited to some European countries; not licensed
and/or available for use in North America), because of
minimal resistance and propensity for collateral damage, but
it may have inferior efﬁcacy compared with other available
therapies (A-I).
5. The ﬂuoroquinolones, oﬂoxacin, ciproﬂoxacin, and
levoﬂoxacin, are highly efﬁcacious in 3-day regimens (A-I)
but have a propensity for collateral damage and should be
reserved for important uses other than acute cystitis and thus
should be considered alternative antimicrobials for acute
cystitis (A-III).6.b-Lactam agents, including amoxicillin-clavulanate,
cefdinir, cefaclor, and cefpodoxime-proxetil, in 3–7-day
regimens are appropriate choices for therapy when other
recommended agents cannot be used (B-I). Other b-lactams,
such as cephalexin, are less well studied but may also be
appropriate in certain settings (B-III). The b-lactams generally
have inferior efﬁcacy and more adverse effects, compared with
other UTI antimicrobials (B-I). For these reasons, b-lactams
other than pivmecillinam should be used with caution foruncomplicated cystitis.
7. Amoxicillin or ampicillin should
not be used for
empirical treatment given the relatively poor efﬁcacy, as
discussed in the 1999 guidelines [1] and the very high
prevalence of antimicrobial resistance to these agents
worldwide [8–11] (A-III).
II.What Is the Treatment for Acute Pyelonephritis?
Recommendations
8. In patients suspected of having pyelonephritis, a urine
culture and susceptibility test should always be performed, and
initial empirical therapy should be tailored appropriately on
the basis of the infecting uropathogen (A-III).
9. Oral ciproﬂoxacin (500 mg twice daily) for 7 days, with or
without an initial 400-mg dose of intravenous ciproﬂoxacin, is
an appropriate choice for therapy in patients not requiringhospitalization where the prevalence of resistance of community
uropathogens to ﬂuoroquinol ones is not known to exceed 10%
(A-I). If an initial one-time intravenous agent is used, a long-
acting antimicrobial, such as 1 g of ceftriaxone or a consolidated
24-h dose of an aminoglycoside, could be used in lieu of an
intravenous ﬂuoroquinolone (B-III). If the prevalence of
ﬂuoroquinolone resistance is thought to exceed 10%, an
initial 1-time intravenous do se of a long-acting parenteral
antimicrobial, such as 1 g of ceftriaxone (B-III) or
a consolidated 24-h dose of an aminoglycoside, is
recommended (B-III).
i. Data are insufﬁcient to make a recommendation about
what ﬂuoroquinolone resistance level requires an alternative
agent in conjunction with or to replace a ﬂuoroquinolone
for treatment of pyelonephritis.
10. A once-daily oral ﬂuoroquinolone, including
ciproﬂoxacin (1000 mg extended release for 7 days)or
levoﬂoxacin (750 mg for 5 days), is an appropriate choice
for therapy in patients not requiring hospitalization wherethe prevalence of resistance of community uropathogens is
not known to exceed 10% (B-II). If the prevalence of
ﬂuoroquinolone resistance is thought to exceed 10%, an initial
intravenous dose of a long-acting parenteral antimicrobial, such
as 1 g of ceftriaxone (B-III) or a consolidated 24-h dose of an
aminoglycoside, is recommended (B-III).
Clinical Practice Guidelines dCID 2011:52 (1 March) de105Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article/52/5/e103/388285 by MUSC Library user on 12 November 2025

11. Oral trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole (160/800 mg [1
double-strength tablet] twice-daily for 14 days) is anappropriate choice for therapy if the uropathogen is knownto be susceptible (A-I). If trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole is
used when the susceptibility is not known, an initial
intravenous dose of a long-acting parenteral antimicrobial,such as 1 g of ceftriaxone (B-II) or a consolidated 24-h dose ofan aminoglycoside, is recommended (B-III).
12. Oral b-lactam agents are less effective than other
available agents for treatment of pyelonephritis (B-III ).If an
oralb-lactam agent is used, an initial intravenous dose of a
long-acting parenteral antimicrobial, such as 1 g of ceftriaxone
(B-II) or a consolidated 24-h dose of an aminoglycoside, is
recommended (B-III).
i. Data are insufﬁcient to modify the previous guidelinerecommendation for a duration of therapy of 10–14 days for
treatment of pyelonephritis with a b-lactam agent.
13. Women with pyelonephritis requiring hospitalization
should be initially treated with an intravenous antimicrobial
regimen, such as a ﬂuoroquinolone; an aminoglycoside, with
or without ampicillin; an extended-spectrum cephalosporinor extended-spectrum penicillin, with or without anaminoglycoside; or a carbapenem. The choice between theseagents should be based on local resistance data, and theregimen should be tailored on the basis of susceptibility results(B-III).
INTRODUCTION
The focus of this guideline is management of women with acute
uncomplicated cystitis and pyelonephritis who are not pregnantand have no known urological abnormalities or co-morbidities.An optimal approach to therapy includes consideration of an-timicrobial resistance and collateral damage.
Consideration of Antimicrobial Resistance
The microbial spectrum of uncomplicated cystitis and pyelo-nephritis consists mainly of Escherichia coli (75%–95%), with
occasional other species of Enterobacteriaceae, such as Proteus
mirabilis and Klebsiella pneumoniae, and Staphylococcus sapro-
phyticus . Other gram-negative and gram-positive species are
rarely isolated in uncomplicated UTIs. Therefore, local antimi-
crobial susceptibility patterns of E. coli in particular should be
considered in empirical antimicrobial selection for un-
complicated UTIs. Since the resistance patterns of E. coli strains
causing uncomplicated UTI varies considerably between regions
and countries, a speciﬁc treatment recommendation may not be
universally suitable for all regions or countries.
Active surveillance studies of in vitro susceptibility of ur-
opathogens in women with uncomplicated cystitis are helpfulin making decisions about empirical therapy. Four large studiesreporting in vitro susceptibility of E. coli causing un-
complicated UTI in North America and Europe were reviewed
[8–11]. All of these demonstrate considerable geographic var-iability in susceptibility. For example, resistance rates for allantimicrobials were higher in US medical centers than inCanadian medical centers and were usually higher in Portugaland Spain than other European countries. In general, resistancerates.20% were reported in all regions for ampicillin, and in
many countries and regions for trimethoprim with or withoutsulfamethoxazole. Fluoroquinolone resistance rates were still,10% in most parts of North America and Europe, but there
was a clear trend for increasing resistance compared with
previous years. Moreover, the resistance data for nalidixic acidin these studies suggest that .10% (in some countries, .20%)
of the E. coli strains have acquired resistance genes for quino-
lones [10, 11]. First- and second-generation oral cepha-losporins and amoxicillin-clavulanic acid also show regionalvariability, but the resistance rates were generally ,10%. De-
spite wide variability in antimicrobial susceptibility among thedifferent countries studied, nitrofurantoin, fosfomycin, and
mecillinam (the latter 2 not tested in the Canadian study) had
good in vitro activity in all the countries investigated. Thus,these 3 antimicrobials could be considered appropriate anti-microbials for empirical therapy in most regions [8–11]. Givena trend toward increasing resistance, compared with previousyears, for most antimicrobials, continued monitoring of thisdata to evaluate rates over time is necessary for sustained op-timization of empirical therapy [12].
Because local in vitro resistance rates are not always known,
and change over time is anticipated, identiﬁcation of individual
predictors of resistance can also be useful to informing empirical
antimicrobial choice. In 2 studies evaluating epidemiologicalpredictors of resistance, the use of trimethoprim-sulfamethox-azole in the preceding 3–6 months was an independent riskfactor for trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole resistance in womenwith acute uncomplicated cystitis [13, 14]. In addition, 2 US-based studies demonstrated that travel outside the United Statesin the preceding 3–6 months was independently associated withtrimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole resistance [15, 16]. Predictorsof resistance to other cystitis antimicrobials are not as wellstudied but in general support the ﬁndings that exposure to the
drug or to an area with endemic resistance are important factors
to consider [17, 18]. Local resistance rates reported in hospitalantibiograms are often skewed by cultures of samples obtainedfrom inpatients or those with complicated infection and maynot predict susceptibilities in women with uncomplicatedcommunity-acquired infection, in whom resistance rates tend tobe lower [18, 19]. Prospective and unbiased resistance sur-veillance of uncomplicated uropathogens at the local practiceand/or health care system levels is critical for informingempirical antimicrobial deci sions. In the absence of such
e106 dCID 2011:52 (1 March) dGupta et alDownloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article/52/5/e103/388285 by MUSC Library user on 12 November 2025

data, use of individual-level pr edictors of resistance can be
helpful.
Because treatment of acute uncomplicated cystitis is usually
empirical, it is likely that some women will be treated with a drugthat does not have in vitro activity against the uropathogen. Asthe population resistance prevalence of a speciﬁc agent increases,the likelihood of failure outweighs the beneﬁts of using the drugempirically. For most agents, clinical and bacterial outcomes arenot well studied for varying levels of resistance; thus, recom-mended thresholds for using alternative agents are based onexpert opinion or secondary analyses of studies that includepatients with isolates resistant to the study drugs. The most ev-idence in this regard is available for trimethoprim-sulfame-
thoxazole, for which clinical, in vitro, and mathematical
modeling studies consistently suggest a 20% resistance preva-lence for the threshold at which the agent is no longer recom-mended for treatment of acute cystitis [20, 21]. There areinsufﬁcient data for other cystitis antimicrobials to recommendresistance levels at which the likelihood of failure outweighs thepotential beneﬁts, and the decision will vary by individualpractitioner discretion. For pyelonephritis, timely use of an agentwith in vitro activity is essential to treat the infection and min-imize progression. Thus, thresholds at which a broad-spectrumagent would be selected empirically followed by directed therapyor for avoiding selected agents because of anticipated in vitro
resistance are set at a relatively low resistance prevalence. The
recommendation of a 10% ﬂuoroquinolone resistance preva-lence as the threshold for using an alternative agent in con-junction with or in place of a ﬂuoroquinolone for pyelonephritisis primarily based on expert opinion, because there are limiteddata to provide evidence-based guidance.
Consideration of Collateral Damage
Collateral damage, a term describing ecological adverse effects ofantimicrobial therapy, such as the selection of drug-resistantorganisms and colonization or infection with multidrug-
resistant organisms, has been associated with use of broad-
spectrum cephalosporins and ﬂuoroquinolones [22, 23]. Use ofbroad spectrum cephalosporins has been linked to subsequentinfection with vancomycin-resistant enterococci, extended-spectrum b-lactamase–producing Klebsiella pneumoniae ,b-
lactam-resistant Acinetobacter species, and Clostridium difﬁcile
[22]. Use of ﬂuoroquinolones has been linked to infection withmethicillin-resistant S. aureus and with increasing ﬂuo-
roquinolone resistance in gram-negative bacilli, such as Pseu-
domonas aeruginosa [22]. The preserved in vitro susceptibility of
E. coli to nitrofurantoin, fosfomycin, and mecillinam over many
years of use suggests these antimicrobials cause only minor
collateral damage [8, 10], perhaps because of minimal effects on
normal fecal ﬂora [24–26]. In contrast, increased rates of anti-microbial resistance have been demonstrated for antimicrobialsthat affect the normal fecal ﬂora more signiﬁcantly, such as
trimethoprim, trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole ,quinolones,
and ampicillin [26, 27].
For uncomplicated cystitis, there are 2 reasons why collateral
damage merits consideration. First, there is minimal risk ofprogression to tissue invasion or sepsis. Moreover, studies ofplacebo for treatment of uncomplicated cystitis demonstratethat clinical cure can be achieved in 25%–42% of women whoare not treated or are treated with a drug without in vitro activityagainst the uropathogen [28, 29]. Thus, spontaneous resolutionmay attenuate differences in clinical outcomes when a drug with80% efﬁcacy is compared with one with 95% efﬁcacy. Of note,placebo therapy is associated with prolongation of symptoms as
well as a small risk of progression to pyelonephritis, as dem-
onstrated by the 1 woman out of 38 women treated with placeboin the study by Christiaens et al [28]. Thus, these data do notjustify withholding antimicrobial therapy for treatment of acutecystitis. Secondly, uncomplicated UTI is one of the most com-mon indications for antimicrobial exposure in an otherwisehealthy population; very small increments in collateral damagerepeated many times may in aggregate magnify the impact ofcollateral damage when it occurs. Although reducing in-appropriate use of ﬂuoroquinolones for respiratory infectionscould have a greater impact on ﬂuoroquinolone resistance,limiting use for UTIs may also mitigate increasing ﬂuo-
roquinolone resistance [30].
Clinical Questions Addressed for the 2010 Update
The Expert Panel addressed the following clinical questions in
the 2010 update:
I. What is the optimal treatment for acute uncomplicated
cystitis in adult nonpregnant, premenopausal women?
II. What is the optimal treatment for acute uncomplicated
pyelonephritis in adult nonpregnant, premenopausal women?
PRACTICE GUIDELINES
‘‘Practice guidelines are systematically developed statements to
assist practitioners and patients in making decisions about ap-propriate health care for speciﬁc clinical circumstances’’ [31].High quality guidelines are clear, reliable and reproducible,
ﬂexible, and based on a multidisciplinary review of evidence
[31]. They should improve quality of care and serve as educa-tional tools.
METHODOLOGY
Panel Composition
The IDSA Standards and Practice Guidelines Committee
(SPGC) in collaboration with European Society for Microbiol-ogy and Infectious Diseases (ESCMID) convened experts in the
Clinical Practice Guidelines dCID 2011:52 (1 March) de107Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article/52/5/e103/388285 by MUSC Library user on 12 November 2025

management of patients with cystitis and pyelonephritis. A
speciﬁc effort was made to include representatives from diversegeographic areas and a wide breadth of specialties, includingurology, obstetrics and gynecology, emergency medicine, family
medicine, internal medicine, and infectious diseases, with a goal
of improving the generalizability and acceptance of the recom-mendations and subsequent incorporation into clinical practice.
Process Overview
The evaluation of evidence for each antimicrobial class used intreatment of cystitis and pyelonephritis was performed by 2members of the panel. Each member was assigned at least oneantimicrobial class to review. The process for evaluating theevidence was based on the IDSA Handbook on Clinical Practice
Guideline Development and involved a systematic weighting of
the quality of the evidence and the grade of recommendation
(Table 1) [32]. This scale had been modiﬁed from the one usedin the 1999 guideline.
The level of evidence rating (I, II, or III) for recommendations
in this guideline refers to evidence of the antimicrobial’s efﬁcacyin randomized clinical trials. The strength of the recommen-dation (A, B, or C) refers to the panel’s level of comfort inrecommending the antimicrobial for the treatment of un-complicated UTI and is based on the drug’s efﬁcacy in clinicaltrials, rates of in vitro resistance among urinary pathogens, andthe drug’s propensity to cause collateral damage and adverseeffects. For example, the panel felt that fosfomycin and piv-
mecillinam should be listed as agents recommended for treat-
ment of uncomplicated cystitis, along with nitrofurantoin andtrimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole, even though they appear to beless efﬁcacious clinically, because they do not appear to causecollateral damage. On the other hand, the panel was less en-thusiastic about strongly recommending ﬂuoroquinolones foracute cystitis, even though they have high clinical efﬁcacy, be-cause of concerns about collateral damage and the subsequentthreat to the usefulness of ﬂuoroquinolones for the treatment ofother more serious infections, including pyelonephritis.It should be emphasized that, as is true with any treatment
guideline, an assessment of the literature for a given agent’sclinical efﬁcacy is limited by the comparators studied. For ex-ample, amoxicillin-clavulanate has been shown to be statistically
signiﬁcantly inferior to ciproﬂoxacin in a randomized trial re-
cently published. On the other hand, in the only publishedrandomized study of cefpodoxime, its clinical efﬁcacy appears tobe comparable to that of trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole. It isnot clear how amoxicillin-clavulanate would compare withcefpodoxime or to trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole.
Literature Review and Analysis
For the update, the Expert Panel completed a review and analysisof data published since 1998. Computerized literature searches
of the Pubmed database were performed. The searches of the
English-language literature from 1998 thru 2008, using theterms, cystitis or pyelonephritis with MESH terms of ‘‘acuteuncomplicated UTI,’’ ‘‘women,’’ and speciﬁc antimicrobials andor classes of antimicrobials. To be included, the study had to bean open-label or randomized, clinical trial of treatment ofwomen with symptoms of acute uncomplicated cystitis or py-elonephritis. At least 1 follow-up visit assessing microbiologicalor clinical response was required. Studies including .10% men
or patients with complicated UTI were excluded. Non–English-language studies were excluded because they could not be re-liably reviewed by panel members.
Outcomes of interest included early (ﬁrst visit after treatment,
typically occurring at 0–7 days after the last dose of the anti-microbial) clinical and microbiological cure, late (last visit aftertreatment, typically occurring 30–45 days after the last dose ofthe antimicrobial) clinical cure, and adverse effects.
Guidelines and Conflict of Interest
All members of the Expert Panel complied with the IDSA policyon conﬂicts of interest, which requires disclosure of any ﬁnancialor other interest that might be construed as constituting an actual,
potential, or apparent conﬂict. Members of the Expert Panel wereTable 1. Strength of Recommendations and Quality of Evidence
Category/grade Deﬁnition
Strength of recommendation
A Good evidence to support a recommendation for or against useB Moderate evidence to support a recommendation for or against useC Poor evidence to support a recommendationQuality of evidenceI Evidence from >1 properly randomized, controlled trial
II Evidence from >1 well-designed clinical trial, without randomization; from cohort or case-
controlled analytic studies (preferably from .1 center); from multiple time-series; or from
dramatic results from uncontrolled experiments
III Evidence from opinions of respected authorities, based on clinical experience, descriptive
studies, or reports of expert committees
NOTE. Data are from the periodic health examination. Canadian Task Force on the Periodic Health Examination. Health Canada ,1979. Adapted and Reproduced
with the permission of the Minister of Public Works and Government Services Canada, 2009 [32].
e108 dCID 2011:52 (1 March) dGupta et alDownloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article/52/5/e103/388285 by MUSC Library user on 12 November 2025

provided IDSA’s conﬂict of interest disclosure statement and were
asked to identify ties to companies developing products that
might be affected by promulgation of the guideline. Informationwas requested regarding employment, consultancies, stock own-ership, honoraria, research funding, expert testimony, andmembership on company advisory committees. The panel madedecisions on a case-by-case basis as to whether an individual’srole should be limited as a result of a conﬂict. Potential conﬂictsare listed in the Acknowledgements section.
Consensus Development Based on Evidence
The Panel met on 7 occasions via teleconference and once inperson to complete the work of the guideline. The purpose of the
teleconferences was to discuss the questions to be addressed, makewriting assignments and discuss recommendations. Most of thework was done with e-mail correspondence. All members of thepanel participated in the preparation and review of the draftguideline. Feedback from external peer reviews was obtained. All
collaborating organizations we re also asked to provide feedback
and endorse the guidelines. The following organizations endorsedthe guidelines: American Congress of Obstetricians and Gyne-cologists, American Urological A ssociation, Association of Med-
ical Microbiology and Infectious Diseases–Canada), and theSociety for Academic Emergency Medicine. The guideline wasreviewed and approved by the IDSA SPGC, the IDSA Board ofDirectors, and the ESCMID Board prior to dissemination.
Revision Dates
At annual intervals, the Panel Chair, the SPGC liaison advisor,and the Chair of the SPGC will determine the need for revisions
to the guideline based on an examination of current literature. If
necessary, the entire Panel will be reconvened to discuss po-tential changes. When appropriate, the panel will recommendrevision of the guideline to the IDSA SPGC and Board and othercollaborating organizations for review and approval.
RESULTS
Literature Search
The literature search identiﬁed 295 potential articles for review,
of which 28 met criteria for inclusion in the analyses. The typesof studies included randomized clinical trials and open labelclinical trials. Expert reviews were also incorporated into theﬁnal grade recommendation. Two panel members were assignedeach antimicrobial class included in the guideline and in-dependently reviewed the relevant literature. These 2 reviewers
compared their results and reached consensus on their ﬁndings
for the antimicrobial class and then presented them to the panel.Discrepancies were discussed by the panel and ﬁnal adjudicationwas based on review by the chairperson and majority vote.
Limitations in the Literature
There were a limited number of publications directly comparingthe same drug given for different durations of therapy [29,33]. Thus, there was insufﬁcient new literature to support fur-
ther analyses of single-dose or 3-day therapy versus longer
therapy included in the previous guideline.
The criteria used to deﬁne clinical and microbiological cure
and the duration of follow-up and timing of follow-up visitswere not uniform across studies. Many studies did not performor report intent to treat analyses; this may inﬂate the late clinicaland microbiological success rates. Major differences in deﬁ-nitions of study outcomes are highlighted in the text.
GUIDELINE RECOMMENDATIONS FOR THE
TREATMENT OF ACUTE UNCOMPLICATED
CYSTITIS AND PYELONEPHRITIS
I. What Is the Optimal Treatment for Acute Uncomplicated
Cystitis?
Recommendations (Figure 1).
1. Nitrofurantoin monohydrate/macrocrystals (100 mg twice
daily for 5 days) is an appropriate choice for therapy due to
minimal resistance and propensity for collateral damage
(deﬁned above) and efﬁcacy comparable to 3 days of
trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole (A-I).
2. Trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole (160/800 mg [1 double-
strength tablet] twice-daily for 3 days) is an appropriate choicefor therapy, given its efﬁcacy as assessed in numerous clinical
trials, if local resistance rates of uropathogens causing acute
uncomplicated cystitis do not exceed 20% or if the infecting
strain is known to be susceptible (A-I).
i. The threshold of 20% as the resistance prevalence at which
the agent is no longer recommended for empirical treatment of
acute cystitis is based on expert opinion derived from clinical,
in vitro, and mathematical modeling studies (B-III).
ii. In some countries and regions, trimethoprim (100 mg twice
daily for 3 days) is the preferred agent and is considered
equivalent to trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole on the basis of
data presented in the original guideline (A-III) [1].
iii. Data are insufﬁcient to make a recommendation for other
cystitis antimicrobials as to what resistance prevalence should be
used to preclude their use for empirical treatment of acute cystitis.
3. Fosfomycin trometamol (3 g in a single dose) is an
appropriate choice for therapy where it is available due to
minimal resistance and propensity for collateral damage, but itappears to have inferior efﬁcacy compared with standard short-
course regimens according to data submitted to the US Food
and Drug Administration (FDA) and summarized in the
Medical Letter (A-I) [7].
4. Pivmecillinam (400 mg bid for 3–7 days) is an
appropriate choice for therapy in regions where it is available
(availability limited to some European countries; not licensed
and/or available for use in North America), because of minimal
Clinical Practice Guidelines dCID 2011:52 (1 March) de109Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article/52/5/e103/388285 by MUSC Library user on 12 November 2025

resistance and propensity for collateral damage, but it may have
inferior efﬁcacy compared with other available therapies (A-I).
5. The ﬂuoroquinolones, oﬂoxacin, ciproﬂoxacin, and
levoﬂoxacin, are highly efﬁcacious in 3-day regimens (A-I) but
have a propensity for collateral damage and should be reserved for
important uses other than acute cystitis and thus should be
considered alternative antimicro bials for acute cystitis (A-III).
6.b-Lactam agents, including amoxicillin-clavulanate,
cefdinir, cefaclor, and cefpodoxime-proxetil, in 3–7-dayregimens are appropriate choices for therapy when other
recommended agents cannot be used (B-I). Other b-lactams,
such as cephalexin, are less well studied but may also be
appropriate in certain settings (B-III). The b-lactams generally
have inferior efﬁcacy and more adverse effects, compared with
other UTI antimicrobials (B-I). For these reasons, b-lactams
other than pivmecillinam should be used with caution for
uncomplicated cystitis.
7. Amoxicillin or ampicillin should
not be used for empirical
treatment given the relatively poor efﬁcacy, as discussed in the
1999 guidelines [1] and the very high prevalence of antimicrobialresistance to these agents worldwide [8–11] (A-III).
Evidence Summary
The optimal agent for therapy of a patient with acute un-
complicated cystitis depends on a number of factors (Figure 2).Each agent has pros and cons related to its use and the choice oftherapy is made on an individual basis.
Trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole. The traditional ﬁrst-line
agent in the United States and recommended in the originalIDSA guidelines was trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole (tri-methoprim was considered comparable) [1]. However, rising
rates of trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole resistance among ur-
opathogens, especially outside of the United States, and con-sistent evidence that in vitro resistance correlates with bacterialand clinical failures, necessitates revising this recommendation.Indeed, the guidelines of the European Association of Urologydo not recommend this agent as ﬁrst choice treatment of un-complicated cystitis [34].Four randomized clinical tria ls compared trimethoprim-
sulfamethoxazole with another agent, including ciproﬂoxacin,
norﬂoxacin, nitrofurantoin, and cefpodoxime proxetil, andevaluated microbiological and clinical outcomes amongwomen with acute cystitis (Table 2) [35–38]. The 2 studiesincluding a ﬂuoroquinolone had ﬁndings consistent with the1999 guideline, reporting that trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazolewas noninferior (95% conﬁdence interval of difference at610%) to ciproﬂoxacin for early clinical and bacterial
cure rates [35, 37]. Both studies used a longer than standard(7 days rather than 3 days) course of trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole versus a 3-day course of ciproﬂoxacin. In thestudy by Iravani et al [37], 7 days of 160/800 mg twice-daily
trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole in 174 women had similar
rates of early and late clinical cure as 3 days of 100 mg cipro-ﬂoxacin given twice daily to 168 women (95% early and90% late for each drug). The late bacterial cure rate (4-6 weeksafter therapy) was lower with trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazolethan for ciproﬂoxacin (79% vs 91%, respectively), whereasthe early bacterial cure rate was higher with trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole (93% vs 88%, respectively). Arredondo-Garciaet al [35] reported that 7 days of trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole(160/800 mg twice daily) in 81 women resulted in early clinicaland bacterial cure rates of 86% and 85%, respectively, non-inferior to the 89% and 92% cure rates, respectively, achieved in
97 women treated with 3 days of ciproﬂoxacin (250 mg twice
daily). Of note, these similar outcomes were demonstrateddespite 15% of women in the trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazolearm having a pretherapy isolate resistant to the treatment drug,compared with only 1% of women in the ciproﬂoxacin arm.Results stratiﬁed by susceptibility of the infecting organism tothe treatment regimen were not reported. Each study includeda third treatment arm; results of these comparisons are discussedbelow for the relevant antimicrobial class.
A small study compared a 3-day course of trimethoprim-
sulfamethoxazole (160/800 mg twice daily) with a 3-day
course of cefpodoxime-proxetil (100 mg twice daily) [38].
Figure 2. Meta-analysis of studies comparing trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole (TMP-SMX) with nitrofurantoin (NTF) for acute uncomplicated cystitis. CI,
confidence interval.
e110 dCID 2011:52 (1 March) dGupta et alDownloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article/52/5/e103/388285 by MUSC Library user on 12 November 2025

Women with an uropathogen re sistant to either study drug
(4 of 82 women in the trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole armand 0 of 81 women in the cefpodoxime arm) were excluded.Clinical cure was achieved in 100% of the 70 women in thetrimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole arm, compared with 62(98%) of 63 women in the cefpo doxime arm. The microbio-
logical cure rates were the same as the clinical cure rates ineach arm. Adverse effects were reported in 1 patient in thetrimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole arm and 2 patients in thecefpodoxime arm.
The fourth study compared a 3-day course of trimethoprim-
sulfamethoxazole (160/800 mg twice daily) with a 5-day
course of nitrofurantoin monohydrate–macrocrystals (100 mgtwice daily) and included women with uropathogens resistantto the study drugs [36]. The primary end point, overall clinicalcure rate at 30 days, was 79% among the 148 women in thetrimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole arm and 84% among the 160women in the nitrofurantoin arm, with a nonsigniﬁcant dif-
ference of -5%. Rates were also equivalent (predeﬁned asa610% difference between agents) at 5-9 days after therapy,
with clinical cure of 90% in each arm and bacterial cure of 91%in the trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole arm and 92% in the ni-trofurantoin arm. There was a signiﬁcantly higher clinical curerate among women in the trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazolearm who had a trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole–susceptibleuropathogen, compared with those who had a trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole–resistant uropathogen (84% vs 41%,respectively;1 P,.001).
The ﬁfth study used a prospective observational trial design
to compare clinical and bacterial outcomes among womenwith acute cystitis with a trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole–susceptible or –resistant uropathogen [21]. All women weretreated with a 5-day course of trimethoprim-sulfamethox-azole (160/800 mg twice daily). T he microbiological cure ratesTable 2. Results from Included Studies of Trimethoprim-Sulfamethoxazole for Treatment of Acute Uncomplicated Cystitis
Study (year) [reference] Treatment regimen
Iravani et al (1999) [37] TMP-SMX,
160/800 mgtwice daily
for 7 daysNitrofurantoin
monohydrate/macrocrystals,
100 mg twice
daily for 7 daysCiproﬂoxacin, 100 mg twice
daily for 3 days
Early clinical cure 165/174 (95) 166/179 (93) 160/168 (95)
Early bacterial cure 161/174 (93) 153/177 (86) 148/168 (88)
Late clinical cure 137/153 (90) 135/151 (89) 132/147 (90)
Adverse events, % 38 34 28
Arredondo-Garcia et al
(2004) [35]TMP-SMX,
160/800 mgtwice daily x 7 daysNorﬂoxacin,
400 mgtwicedaily for 7 daysCiproﬂoxacin, 250 mg
twice daily for 3 days
Early clinical cure 70/81 (86) 90/107 (84) 86/97 (89)
Early bacterial cure 69/81 (85) 93/107 (87) 89/97 (92)Late clinical cure 66/81 (82) 88/107 (82) 81/97 (84)Adverse events, % 8.7 3.9 4.0
Kavatha et al
(2003) [38]TMP-SMX,
160/800 mgtwicedaily for 3 daysCefpodoxime
proxetil, 100mg twice dailyfor 3 days
Early clinical cure 70/70 (100) 62/63 (98.4)Early bacterial cure 70/70 (100) 62/63 (98.4)Late clinical cure 51/60 (85) 42/50 (84)Adverse events, % 1.4 1.6
Gupta et al
(2007) [36]TMP-SMX, 160/800
mgtwice dailyfor 3 daysNitrofurantoin
monohydrate/macrocrystals,100 mg twicedaily for 5 days
Early clinical cure 133/148 (90) 144/160 (90)Early bacterial cure 131/144 (91) 141/154 (92)Late clinical cure 117/148 (79) 134/160 (84)Adverse events, % 31 28%
NOTE. Data are proportion of subjects (%), unless otherwise indicated. Efﬁcacy rates refer to cure rates on the visit closest to a 5–9-day period following
treatment. NA, not available; TMP-SMX, trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole.
Clinical Practice Guidelines dCID 2011:52 (1 March) de111Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article/52/5/e103/388285 by MUSC Library user on 12 November 2025

were signiﬁcantly higher among women with a trimethoprim-
sulfamethoxazole–susceptible uropathogen than for women
with a –resistant uropathogen (86% vs 42%, respectively; P,
.001). The clinical cure rate at 5-9 days after completion oftherapy was also higher in the t rimethoprim-sulfamethox-
azole–susceptible group (88% of 333 women) than in thetrimethoprim-sulfamethoxaz ole–resistant group (54% of 151
women; P,.001). The clinical and microbiological differ-
ences remained signiﬁcant at the 28–42-day follow-up visit.Because this was not a randomized treatment trial, the datawere not included in the efﬁcacy analyses but are reported asthey provide insight into expected outcomes in patients withresistant uropathogens.
Overall ﬁndings from these studies demonstrate that
trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole remains a highly effectivetreatment for acute uncomplicated cystitis in women when therate of resistance is known or expected to be ,20%, supporting
a strong recommendation for use in such settings. Early clinicaland microbiological cure rates are in the 90% - 100% range(Table 2). Late outcomes are harder to compare across studies,but when calculated using intent to treat criteria, are 80% - 90%.Resistance impacts both clinical and bacterial outcomes, so
known or expected resistance should be considered in antimi-
crobial choice. In this regard, resistance to trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole is high in many regions of the world.However, in settings with a 10% - 15% prevalence of resistanceto trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazol e, cure rates with trimethoprim-
sulfamethoxazole were equivalent to those with comparatordrugs (ie, ciproﬂoxacin and nitrofurantoin) to which almostall isolates were probably susceptible (data on susceptibilityto comparators were not uniformly provided in the studies) [35–37]. Trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole use is associated withincreased resistance, but, even though it has a signiﬁcant impacton intestinal ﬂora, it is generally not thought to have a propensity
for ‘‘collateral damage’’ as observed with broad-spectrum
cephalosporins or ﬂuoroquinolones.
Nitrofurantoin. There is additional evidence in support
of nitrofurantoin monohydrate/macrocrystals, for which datawere previously limited. There were 4 randomized trials ofnitrofurantoin versus a comparator published since the pre-vious guideline (Table 3) [28, 36, 37, 39]. These studiesdemonstrate that (1) nitrofurantoin monohydrate/
Table 3. Results from Included Studies of Nitrofurantoin for Treatment of Acute Uncomplicated Cystitis
Study Regimen
Iravani et al (1999) [37] Nitrofurantoin monohydrate/
macrocrystals, 100 mg twice
daily for 7 daysTMP-SMX, 160/800
mg twice daily for 7 daysCiproﬂoxacin, 100 mg
twice daily for 3 days
Early clinical cure 166/179 (93) 165/174 (95) 160/168 (95)
Early bacterial cure 153/177 (86) 161/174 (93) 148/168 (88)Late clinical cure 135/151 (89) 137/153 (90) 132/147 (90)Adverse events, % 34 38 28Stein et al (1999) [39] Nitrofurantoin monohydrate/
macrocrystals, 100 mg twicedaily for 7 daysFosfomycin trometamol,
single 3-gdose
Early clinical cure 232/245 (95) 240/263 (90)
Early bacterial cure 189/219 (86) 192/246 (78)Late clinical cure 168/180 (93) 189/202 (94)Adverse events, % 5.6 5.3Christiaens et al (2002) [28] Nitrofurantoin macrocrystals,
100 mg 4 times daily for 3 daysPlacebo, 4 times
daily for 3 days
Early clinical cure 21/24 (88) 13/23 (54)
Early bacterial cure 17/23 (74) 9/22 (41)
Late clinical cure NA NAAdverse events, % 23 26Gupta et al (2007) [36] Nitrofurantoin monohydrate/
macrocrystals, 100 mg twicedaily for 5 daysTMP-SMX, 160/800
mg twice daily for 3 days
Early clinical cure 144/160 (90) 133/148 (90)
Early bacterial cure 141/154 (92) 131/144 (91)Late clinical cure 134/160 (84) 117/148 (79)Adverse events, % 28 31
NOTE. Data are proportion of subjects (%), unless otherwise indicated. Efﬁcacy rates refer to cure rates on the visit closest to a 5–9-day period following
treatment. NA, not available; TMP-SMX, trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole.
e112 dCID 2011:52 (1 March) dGupta et alDownloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article/52/5/e103/388285 by MUSC Library user on 12 November 2025

macrocrystals (100 mg twice daily for 7 days) has similar
clinical cure rates (based on the small differences in early
clinical cure and conﬁdence intervals that are small enough tosuggest no difference in efﬁcacy) to ciproﬂoxacin (100 mgtwice daily for 3 days; 93% vs 95%), trimethoprim-sulfame-thoxazole (160/800 mg twice daily for 7 days; 93% vs 95%),and 3-g single-dose fosfomycin trometamol (89% vs 90%);(2) nitrofurantoin monohydrate/macrocrystals (100 mg twicedaily in a 5-day regimen) is equivalent in clinical and mi-crobiological cure rates to trim ethoprim-sulfamethoxazole
(160/800 mg twice daily in a 3-day regimen); and (3) nitro-furantoin macrocrystals (100 mg 4 times daily for 3 days) issuperior to placebo treatment of women with acute cystitis.
Taken together, the studies demonstrate a clinical cure rate
with nitrofurantoin of 88% - 93% and a bacterial cure rate of81% - 92%. A meta-analysis of studies comparing early clin-ical cure rates with nitrofurantoin and trimethoprim-sulfa-methoxazole is shown in Figure 2 and demonstratesequivalence between the 2 agents. Of note, resistance to ni-trofurantoin remains low and it is well tolerated and efﬁca-cious in a 5-day regimen (Table 4).
Thus, current randomized clinical trial data provide strong
support for consideration of nitrofurantoin as an effective agentfor treatment of acute cystitis. Demonstration of efﬁcacy, withminimal drug resistance or propensity for collateral damage,
makes nitrofurantoin an attractive agent for cystitis. A 5-dayregimen, rather than the traditional 7-day course, can be con-
sidered as an effective duration of treatment based on a recent
randomized clinical trial [36].
Fosfomycin trometamol. There are also new data in support
of fosfomycin trometamol, a phosphonic acid derivative availablein the United States and some European countries for treatmentof UTI. A 3-g single-dose of fosfomycin trometamol was com-pared with a 7–day course of nitrofurantoin monohydrate/macrocrystals 100 mg twice daily in one study and with a 5-daycourse of trimethoprim 100 mg twice daily in another [39, 40].The latter study only evaluated the microbiologic outcome andreported that single-dose fosfomycin trometamol and 5 days oftwice-daily trimethoprim each had an 83% bacterial cure rate
(147 of 177 fosfomycin and 70 of 84 trimethoprim-treated
women, respectively) at the early follow-up visit [34]. The studyby Stein [39] demonstrated that the early clinical response (cureor improvement at 5-11 days after starting therapy) rates werenot signiﬁcantly different, at 91% (240 of 263 women) for 3-gsingle-dose fosfomycin trometamol treatment and 95% (232 of245 women) for 100 mg of nitrofurantoin monohydrate/mac-rocrystals given twice daily. The late clinical response rates re-mained high for both drugs (93%–94%). However, them i c r o b i o l o g i cc u r er a t ew a ss i gniﬁcantly higher with nitro-
furantoin (86%), compared with fosfomycin (78%), at the ﬁrstfollow-up visit ( P5.02). Microbiologic cure rates 4-6 weeks after
therapy were 96% for fosfomycin and 91% for nitrofurantoin but
Table 4. Treatment Regimens and Expected Early Efficacy Rates for Acute Uncomplicated Cystitis
Mean percentage (range)
Drug (dosage)Estimated clinical
efﬁcacyabEstimated
microbiological
efﬁcacybCommon side effects References
Nitrofurantoin monohydrate/
macrocrystals (100 mg twicedaily for 5–7 days)93 (84–95) 88 (86–92) Nausea,headache [36, 37, 39]
Trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole
(160/800 mg twice daily for 3 days)93 (90–100) 94 (91–100) Rash, urticaria,nausea,
vomiting, hematologic[36, 37]
Fosfomycin trometamol (3 g
single-dose sachet)91 80 (78–83) Diarrhea, nausea,headache [39, 40]
Pivmecillinam (400 mg twice
daily for 3–7 days)73 (55–82) 79 (74–84) Nausea, vomiting, diarrhea [29, 43]
Fluoroquinolones (dose varies
by agent; 3–day regimen)c90 (85–98) 91 (81–98) Nausea/vomiting,
diarrhea, headache,drowsiness, insomnia[35, 43, 44, 46–52]
b-lactams (dose varies by
agent; 3–5 day regimen)d89 (79–98) 82 (74–98) Diarrhea, nausea,
vomiting, rash, urticaria[38, 52, 54]
aEfﬁcacy rates refer to cure rates on the visit closest to a 5–9-day period following treatment, and are averages or ranges calculated from clinical tri als discussed
in the text.
bEstimated clinical efﬁcacy and microbiological efﬁcacy rates should not necessarily be compared across agents, because study design, efﬁcacy deﬁn ition,
therapy duration, and other factors are heterogeneous. Studies represent clinical trials published since publication of the 1999 Infectious Disea se Society of America
guidelines so as to represent efﬁcacy rates that account for contemporary prevalence of antibiotic-resistant uropathogens. Note that efﬁcacy rate s may vary
geographically depending on local patterns of antimicrobial resistance among uropathogens. See text for details.
cData on fluoroquinolones are compiled from regimens of oﬂoxacin, norﬂoxacin, and ciproﬂoxacin from the referenced clinical trials and not other
ﬂuoroquinolones that are no longer commercially available. See text for details.
dData on blactams data cited are derived from clinical trials examining second and third generation cephalosporins and amoxicillin-clavulanate. See text fo r details.
Clinical Practice Guidelines dCID 2011:52 (1 March) de113Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article/52/5/e103/388285 by MUSC Library user on 12 November 2025

included only /C2450% of the original study population. Intent–to-
treat analyses were not reported [39]. Overall, the bacterial efﬁ-
cacy of fosfomycin is lower than that of other ﬁrst-line agents,but clinical efﬁcacy (based on a single study) was comparable(Table 4). Additional information considered by the com-mittee was the reference in the 1999 IDSA UTI guideline tounpublished data demonstrating lower bacterial eradicationrates with fosfomycin than with 10 days of trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole and with 7 days of ciproﬂoxacin. Thesestudies are still not available in the published literature exceptas previously referenced in a Medical Letter report [7].
Several in vitro studies examined the activity of fosfomycin
against multidrug-resistant pathogens. These demonstrate that
fosfomycin is active against vancomycin-resistant enterococci
(VRE), methicillin-resistant S. aureus (MRSA), and extended-
spectrum b-lactamase (ESBL)–producing gram-negative rods
[41]. As resistance among uropathogens causing community-acquired uncomplicated cystitis increases, fosfomycin may be-come more useful, particularly if no other oral agents with invitro activity are available [42]. Clinical outcomes are not yetreported from randomized, controlled studies; thus, speciﬁcrecommendations for the role of fosfomycin in the treatment ofmultidrug-resistant uropathogens cannot be included in thecurrent guideline. However, observational studies are supportiveof clinical efﬁcacy [41, 42].
The convenience of a single-dose regimen, in vitro activity
against resistant gram-negative rods, and minimal propensityfor collateral damage make fosfomycin a useful choice in someareas. It is recommended as a ﬁrst-line agent in the guidelines ofthe European Association of Urology, although it is not uni-formly available [34]. Susceptibility data are also not uniformlyavailable, because testing is not routinely performed in manyclinical laboratories. Furthermore, the effect of fosfomycin onthe intestinal ﬂora after intake of a single 3-g dose (the standarddosage for uncomplicated UTI) has not been well studied, butthe effect is probably minor [25]. This assumption is supported
by the high rate of E. coli susceptibility in regions with frequent
use of fosfomycin for uncomplicated cystitis in women [10].
Pivmecillinam. Pivmecillinam, the orally bioavailable form
of mecillinam, is distinguished from other b-lactams because of
its speciﬁcity for the urinary tract, minimal resistance or pro-pensity for collateral damage, and reasonable treatment efﬁcacy.It is an extended gram-negative spectrum penicillin used onlyfor treatment of UTI. Two studies met our inclusion criteria[43]. One study compared different doses of pivmecillinam withplacebo. Pivmecillinam at 200 mg 3 times daily for 7 days,200 mg twice daily for 7 days, and 400 mg twice daily for 3 daysresulted in early clinical cure rates of 62% (132 of 217 women),
64% (136 of 220 women), and 55% (119 of 220 women), re-
spectively, and bacteriologic cure rates of 93%, 94%, and 84%,respectively. Placebo therapy resulted in a clinical cure rate of25% (54 of 227 women) and a bacteriologic cure rate of 34%,
both inferior to active drug. In another randomized trial com-
paring 3 days of pivmecillinam (400 mg bid) with 3 days ofnorﬂoxacin (400 mg bid), pivmecillinam treatment resulted inlower bacterial cure rates (222 (75%) of 298 vs 276 (91%) of 302,respectively; P,.001) and lower clinical cure rates (360 (82%)
of 437 vs 381 (88%) of 433, respectively; P5.02) [43]. In vitro
resistance to pivmecillinam was not associated with a high rateof failure; 30 (88%) of 34 pivmecillinam-treated patients whohad a pivmecillinam-resistant uropathogen achieved bacterialcure.
Although not available in the United States or Canada, piv-
mecillinam is one of the agents of choice in many Nordic
countries due to low resistance rates and low propagation of
resistance [24]. Different doses and durations have been asso-ciated with varying efﬁcacy rates, and a 5-day or 7-day regimenis probably superior to a 3-day regimen. Similarly, a 400-mgdose fared better than a 200-mg dose for both bacterial andclinical efﬁcacy. The efﬁcacy rates are notably lower than otherrecommended agents (Table 4). Of note, the rate of resistanceamong E. coli to pivmecillinam remains low despite its frequent
use in some European countries [24].
Fluoroquinolones. There were 12 randomized trials of
ﬂuoroquinolones for treatment of acute cystitis. The majority ofthese compared one ﬂuoroquinolone with another, often in
varying doses or durations. Sparﬂoxacin and gatiﬂoxacin are no
longer widely available because of their adverse effects, and thus,results related to these 2 agents are not included in the analyses[44–47]. Two large studies compared 500 mg of extended-release once-daily ciproﬂoxacin to the 250-mg twice-daily for-mulation of ciproﬂoxacin and demonstrated equivalent curerates [48, 49]. Another study compared ciproﬂoxacin (250 mgtwice daily) in a 3-day versus a 7-day regimen and demonstratedequivalent cure rates but signiﬁcantly higher adverse event rateswith the longer regimen [50]. A small study compared nor-ﬂoxacin 400 mg twice daily with norﬂoxacin 800 mg once daily
and demonstrated similar bacterial and clinical outcomes, albeit
with limited power to detect true differences [33]. One studycompared single-dose ciproﬂoxacin with 3 days of norﬂoxacinand found the agents to be equivalent, with microbiological andclinical cure rates in the 91% - 94% range [51].
Three studies compared a ﬂuoroquinolone with a drug from
another class. Two demonstrated better clinical and microbio-logical cure rates with the ﬂuoroquinolone regimen (norﬂoxacinvs pivmecillinam and ciproﬂoxacin vs amoxicillin-clavulanate)[43, 52]. The third demonstrated early clinical and bacterialcure rates to be similar with 3 days of low-dose ciproﬂoxacinor a standard dose but longer duration (7 days each) of
trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole and nitrofurantoin [37]. The
details for each of these studies are discussed under therespective comparator agent. Overall clinical and bacterial
e114 dCID 2011:52 (1 March) dGupta et alDownloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article/52/5/e103/388285 by MUSC Library user on 12 November 2025

efﬁcacy rates in the studies are consistently high, although they
were occasionally ,90% (Table 4).
Thus, ﬂuoroquinolones remain very effective for the treat-
ment of acute cystitis, although increased ﬂuoroquinolone re-sistance among community uropathogens is mitigating theusefulness of this antimicrobial class. Once-daily dosing of ci-proﬂoxacin is now available and of equal efﬁcacy as the twice-daily formulation, albeit more expensive, since the latter is nowgeneric. Single-dose ﬂuoroquinolone therapy remains an optionbut with possibly lower efﬁcacy rates than with longer regimens[1]. Fluoroquinolones with longer half-lives, such as peﬂoxacinand ﬂeroxacin, may be useful for single-dose therapy, but nostudies met our eligibility criteria and neither agent is available
in all locales, including North America and many parts of Eu-
rope. The main concern regarding ﬂuoroquinolone use for acutecystitis is the promotion of ﬂuoroquinolone resistance, not onlyamong uropathogens but also other organisms, causing moreserious and difﬁcult–to-treat infections at other sites. There isalso concern about the association between ﬂuoroquinolone useand increased rates of MRSA [22]. Many experts now call forrestricting use of ﬂuoroquinolones to those episodes of un-complicated cystitis when other UTI antimicrobials are notsuitable [53]. The panel agrees and recommends that ﬂuo-roquinolones be reserved as an alternative only when other UTIagents cannot be used (Figure 1).
b-Lactams. Five randomized trials evaluating b-lactam
antibiotics were identiﬁed and included in the analyses.Only 1 study included a 3-day regimen of trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole as the standard comparator [38]. This studydemonstrated that 100 mg of cefpodoxime proxetil twicedaily for 3 days was equivalent to trimethoprim-sulfame-thoxazole (160/800 mg twice daily for 3 days), with 100% of70 women treated with trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole and98% of 63 women treated with cefpodoxime experiencingclinical and microbiological cu red at day 4–7 after completion
of therapy. Clinical cure at 28 days was somewhat lower but
not different between the treatment arms (Table 2). However,
the statistical power of the study to ﬁnd differences betweenthe drugs was limited by its small sample size. Side effectswere not different between the 2 groups. In another study,amoxicillin-clavulanate (500/125 mg twice daily) was com-pared with ciproﬂoxacin (250 mg twice daily), both for 3 days,with 4 months of follow-up [52]. Clinical cure at the lastfollow-up visit was observed in 58% of 160 women treated withamoxicillin-clavulanate, compared with 77% of 162 womentreated with ciproﬂoxacin ( P,.001). The differences were
signiﬁcant even among the subgroups of women infected withstrains susceptible to the treatment drug (60% vs 77%, re-
spectively; P5.004). Microbiological cure at 2 weeks was
observed in 76% of 156 women treated with amoxicillin-clavulanate, compared with 95% of 161 women treated withciproﬂoxacin ( P,.001) [52]. Vaginal colonization with ur-
opathogens before and after therapy was also measured, and the
higher clinical failure rate observed with amoxicillin-clavulanatewas associated with a lower rate of eradication of vaginal ur-opathogens in the amoxicillin-clavulanate group. These ﬁndingsare consistent with the postulated mechanism for b-lactam
inferiority in the treatment of UTI being, in part, related topersistence of the vaginal reservoir for infection. Another studycompared 2 b-lactam antibiotics, cefdinir (100 mg twice daily)
versus ceﬂacor (250 mg 3 times daily), each for 5 days, anddemonstrated equivalent clinical (91% vs 93%, respectively) andmicrobiological (85% vs 80%, respectively) cure rates [54].
Thus, the overall evidence of the efﬁcacy of b-lactams for
treatment of acute cystitis has not changed since the previous
guideline [1]. Most studies demonstrate that b-lactams are
generally inferior in cure rates to the ﬂuoroquinolones [42, 52].The study by Kavatha et al [38] demonstrating that an advancedgeneration oral cephalosporin (cefpodoxime proxetil) resultedin cure rates equivalent to those of trimethoprim-sulfame-thoxazole is intriguing and needs to be conﬁrmed in a largerclinical trial [38]. However, even if these observations are con-ﬁrmed, concern about emergence of gram-negative ESBL re-sistance to these agents limits enthusiasm for any widespreaduse. Broad-spectrum cephalosporins, in particular, have beenassociated with collateral damage, the most concerning of which
is ESBL resistance among gram-negative bacteria [22]. Nar-
rower-spectrum cephalosporins are often used for treatment ofUTI and may result in less collateral damage, compared withbroad-spectrum cephalosporins; however, there is a lack of ad-equately powered studies to make speciﬁc recommendations forthese agents. Thus, the panel feels that currently available datasupports avoidance of b-lactams other than pivmecillinam for
empirical therapy of uncomplicated cystitis unless none of therecommended agents are appropriate.
The choice of agent should be individualized on the basis of
patient allergy and compliance history, local practice patterns,
local community resistance prevalence, availability, cost, and
patient and provider threshold for failure. In the event of di-agnostic uncertainty regarding cystitis versus early pyelone-phritis, use of agents such as nitrofurantoin, fosfomycin, andpivmecillinam should be avoided, because they do not achieveadequate renal tissue levels. Such uncertainly may exist in thesetting of cystitis symptoms accompanied by subjective fever thatis not veriﬁed at the time of examination, a prolonged durationof cystitis symptoms (typically greater than 5–7 days), or vagueﬂank pain or tenderness which is not otherwise explained.
II. What Is the Treatment for Acute Pyelonephritis?
Recommendations.
8. In patients suspected of having pyelonephritis, a urine
culture and susceptibility test should always be performed, and
Clinical Practice Guidelines dCID 2011:52 (1 March) de115Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article/52/5/e103/388285 by MUSC Library user on 12 November 2025

initial empirical therapy should be tailored appropriately on
the basis of the infecting uropathogen (A-III).
9. Oral ciproﬂoxacin (500 mg twice daily) for 7 days, with or
without an initial 400-mg dose of intravenous ciproﬂoxacin, is
an appropriate choice for therapy in patients not requiring
hospitalization where the prevalence of resistance of
community uropathogens to ﬂuoroquinolones is not known
to exceed 10% (A-I). If an initial one-time intravenous agent isused, a long-acting antimicrobial, such as 1 gof ceftriaxone or
a consolidated 24-h dose of an aminoglycoside, could be used
in lieu of an intravenous ﬂuoroquinolone (B-III). If the
prevalence of ﬂuoroquinolone resistance is thought to exceed
10%, an initial 1-time intravenous dose of a long-acting
parenteral antimicrobial, such as 1 g of ceftriaxone (B-III) or
a consolidated 24-h dose of an aminoglycoside, is
recommended (B-III).
i. Data are insufﬁcient to make a recommendation about what
ﬂuoroquinolone resistance level requires an alternative agent in
conjunction with or to replace a ﬂuoroquinolone for treatment
of pyelonephritis.
10. A once-daily oral ﬂuoroquinolone, including
ciproﬂoxacin (1000 mg extended release for 7 days)or
levoﬂoxacin (750 mg for 5 days), is an appropriate choice for
therapy in patients not requiring hospitalization where the
prevalence of resistance of community uropathogens is not
known to exceed 10% (B-II). If the prevalence of ﬂuoroquinolone
resistance is thought to exceed 10%, an initial intravenous dose of
a long-acting parenteral antimicrobial, such as 1 g of ceftriaxone
(B-III) or a consolidated 24-h dose of an aminoglycoside, is
recommended (B-III).
11. Oral trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole (160/800 mg [1
double-strength tablet] twice-daily for 14 days) is an
appropriate choice for therapy if the uropathogen is known
to be susceptible (A-I). If trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole is
used when the susceptibility is not known, an initial
intravenous dose of a long-acting parenteral antimicrobial,
such as 1 g of ceftriaxone (B-II) or a consolidated 24-h dose of
an aminoglycoside, is recommended (B-III).
12. Oral b-lactam agents are less effective than other
available agents for treatment of pyelonephritis (B-III ).If an
oral b-lactam agent is used, an initial intravenous dose of
a long-acting parenteral antimicrobial, such as 1 g of
ceftriaxone (B-II) or a consolidated 24-h dose of an
aminoglycoside, is recommended (B-III).
i. Data are insufﬁcient to modify the previous guideline
recommendation for a duration of therapy of 10–14 days for
treatment of pyelonephritis with a b-lactam agent.
13. Women with pyelonephritis requiring hospitalization
should be initially treated with an intravenous antimicrobial
regimen, such as a ﬂuoroquinolone; an aminoglycoside, with orwithout ampicillin; an extended-spectrum cephalosporin or
extended-spectrum penicillin, with or without an
aminoglycoside; or a carbapenem. The choice between these
agents should be based on local resistance data, and the
regimen should be tailored on the basis of susceptibility
results (B-III).
Evidence Summary
Optimal therapy for acute uncomplicated pyelonephritis de-
pends on the severity of illness at presentation and local re-sistance patterns as well as speciﬁc host factors (such asallergies). In addition, urine culture and susceptibility testingshould be performed, and initial empirical therapy should betailored appropriately on the basis of the infecting uropathogen.
Strategies for optimizing empirical therapy when local resistance
patterns are not known include using an initial intravenous doseof a long-acting parenteral antimicrobial and starting witha broader-spectrum agent and narrowing therapy when labo-ratory results are available.
There were 6 treatment studies of acute uncomplicated py-
elonephritis identiﬁed, but only 1 study met our inclusion cri-teria. This study compared a 7-day regimen of oral ciproﬂoxacin(500 mg twice daily) with a 14-day regimen of trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole (160/800 mg twice daily) for treatment ofwomen presenting to emergency departments or outpatient
clinics with mild to moderate pyelonephritis [55]. An initial
intravenous 400-mg dose of ciproﬂoxacin in the ciproﬂoxacingroup or a 1-g dose of ceftriaxone in the trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole group was allowed in the protocol at thediscretion of the clinician. Women with an uropathogen re-sistant to the study drug to which they were randomized con-tinued to receive the drug unless they experienced clinical failure(14 women in the trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole group and 1woman in the ciproﬂoxacin group). Ciproﬂoxacin had signiﬁ-cantly higher microbiological (99% vs 89%, respectively) andclinical (96% vs 83%, respectively) cure rates at the early post-therapy visit. Cure rates were similar regardless of whether
an initial intravenous dose of ciproﬂoxacin was given. Among
trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole–treated women, those with atrimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole–resistant uropathogen hadsigniﬁcantly lower microbiological eradication and clinical curerates, compared with those with a susceptible uropathogen.An initial intravenous dose of ceftriaxone signiﬁcantlyimproved the microbiological eradication rate and moderatelyimproved the clinical cure rate in women with a trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole–resistant uropathogen.
Two additional studies also demonstrated that a 5–7-day
regimen of a once-daily ﬂuoroquinolone (ciproﬂoxacin, 1000mg extended release, and levoﬂoxacin, 750 mg, respectively)
were effective for acute pyelonephritis [56, 57]. These studies did
not meet our inclusion criteria because they included
e116 dCID 2011:52 (1 March) dGupta et alDownloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article/52/5/e103/388285 by MUSC Library user on 12 November 2025

a mixed population of men and women with acute pyelone-
phritis and/or complicated UTIs, but they do lend additional
support for a 5–7-day ﬂuoroquinolone regimen versus the tra-ditional 14-day regimen for mild to moderate pyelonephritis. Astudy of once-daily gatiﬂoxacin (200 mg or 400 mg) was similarin design and outcomes but is not discussed further because theoral formulation is no longer available in most parts of the world[58]. Another pyelonephritis study demonstrated that 10 days ofan oral ﬂuoroquinolone (norﬂoxacin, 400 mg twice daily) re-sulted in lower bacterial relapse rates than did 10 days of cefti-buten (200 mg twice daily), with each group receivingintravenous cefuroxime for 2–4 days prior to randomization tothe study drugs [59]. This study also included a mixed pop-
ulation of men and women and thus did not meet our inclusion
criteria. Another study demonstrated that initial therapy withintravenous ceftriaxone (1 g for 3 days) was comparable to 1dose of intravenous ceftriaxone (1 g) followed by oral ceﬁxime(400 mg once daily for 2 days). Both groups received a 10-daycourse of an oral antibiotic on the basis of susceptibility testresults after the initial regimen was completed [60].
The ﬁndings from the 1 study that met our speciﬁc inclusion
and exclusion criteria as well as the additional studies describedsupport the superior efﬁcacy of ﬂuoroquinolone regimens fortreatment of acute pyelonephritis [55]. These studies also dem-onstrate efﬁcacy of a 5–7-day regimen and once-daily dosing for
mild to moderate pyelonephritis. In regions with low levels of
ﬂuoroquinolone resistance among outpatient uncomplicatedpyelonephritis isolates, as demonstrated in 2 recent US studies,the ﬂuoroquinolones are the preferred antimicrobial class for oraltherapy [18, 61]. For some areas of the world, including certainareas of the United States, the prevalence of ﬂuoroquinoloneresistance is .10%. In such areas, it is recommended that a dose
of a long-acting parenteral antimicrobial, such as a 1-g dose ofceftriaxone or a consolidated 24-h dose of an aminoglycoside (eg,one 5–7-mg/kg dose of gentamicin), be given once at the initia-tion of therapy. Some experts prefer to continue the parenteral
agent until susceptibility data are available; this strategy is not well
studied, but it can be considered depending on feasibility andclinical judgment. The parenteral agent may be administered viathe intramuscular route if the intravenous route is not available,but there are limited data supporting this approach.
High rates of resistance to trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole
with corresponding failure rates for resistant isolates make this
agent an inferior choice for empi rical therapy, but it is highly
efﬁcacious in pyelonephritis if th e causative organism is suscep-
tible. The current efﬁcacy rates observed for trimethoprim-sulfa-methoxazole in the treatment of p yelonephritis are based on a 14-
day regimen, which is the FDA-approved duration of treatment
[55]. However, there are no data to suggest a shorter course of
trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole would not be effective when theuropathogen is susceptible, and additional studies of short-courseregimens are warranted. If trime thoprim-sulfamethoxazole is
used empirically, an initial intravenous dose of ceftriaxone is
recommended as this combination resulted in improved clinicaland bacterial cure rates in the st udy by Talan et al [55]. Although
not formally studied, a consolidated 24-h dose of an amino-glycoside could also be consid ered in place of ceftriaxone.
Oral b-lactam agents should be used with caution for treat-
ment of pyelonephritis, on the basis of studies outlined in theprevious guideline demonstrating inferior efﬁcacy and higherrelapse rates compared with trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole[1]. Those studies primarily evaluated aminopenicillins. Currentdata on oral cephalosporins are limited but are suggestive ofinferior efﬁcacy compared with the ﬂuoroquinolones [59]. If an
oralb-lactam is used, an initial intravenous dose of ceftriaxone
or a consolidated 24-h dose of an aminoglycoside is recom-mended. Continued use of the oral b-lactam is reasonable only if
the uropathogen is susceptible. Initial coadministration ofa parenteral agent is supported in part by the ﬁndings of Sanchezet al [60], who reported similar outcomes with ‘ one dose ofceftriaxone versus a 3-day course of ceftriaxone followed by oralb-lactam therapy in women with uncomplicated pyelonephritis.
As outlined in the previous guideline, a total course of 10–14days of therapy is likely sufﬁcient when using an oral b-lactam
for treatment of uncomplicated pyelonephritis.
Uncomplicated cystitis or pyelonephritis due to MRSA is
uncommon, and at this time, there are insufﬁcient data to rec-
ommend use of an MRSA-active agent for empirical therapy ofuncomplicated UTI. Recommendations for treatment of acuteuncomplicated pyelonephritis that is accompanied by nausea orvomiting, which precludes oral intake or otherwise requireshospitalization, are the same as previously outlined in the 1999IDSA guideline, because no new data are available to warrantrevisions [1]. Given rising rates of ampicillin resistance amonggram-negative organisms, the use of ampicillin should be lim-ited to patients in whom Enterococcus infection is suspected as
the pathogen (based on previous history) and should be ac-
companied by an aminoglycoside. Broad-spectrum antimicro-
bial coverage should be tailored, as appropriate, on the basis ofurine culture and susceptibility results.
FUTURE DIRECTIONS AND RESEARCH GAPS IN
MANAGEMENT OF ACUTE UNCOMPLICATED
CYSTITIS AND PYELONEPHRITIS
As listed below, the panel identiﬁed several areas warranting
further investigation.
dBetter understanding of collateral damage in the treatment
of uncomplicated cystitis.
dBetter understanding of the public health impact of
antimicrobial use and resistance in women with sporadic
uncomplicated UTI.
Clinical Practice Guidelines dCID 2011:52 (1 March) de117Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article/52/5/e103/388285 by MUSC Library user on 12 November 2025

dRole of MRSA in uncomplicated cystitis and pyelonephritis.
dEfﬁcacy of narrow-spectrum cephalosporins in treatment of
uncomplicated cystitis.
dRole of oral broad-spectrum cephalosporins for outpatient
treatment of pyelonephritis in regions with high prevalence of
resistance to ﬂuoroquinolones.
dEfﬁcacy of short course (7–10 day) regimens with
trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole for pyelonephritis caused by
a trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole susceptible pathogen.
dOptimal therapy of acute cystitis in women who are
postmenopausal or have well-controlled diabetes without
urological sequelae.
dBetter understanding of optimal treatment regimens for
ESBL- producing uropathogens causing uncomplicated UTI.
dAdditional studies of clinical efﬁcacy rates achieved in the
setting of an acute cystitis uropathogen that is resistant to the
antimicrobial agent used for treatment.
dProspective and unbiased resistance surveillance of
uropathogens at the local practice and/or health care system
level in order to best inform antimicrobial decisions.
PERFORMANCE MEASURES
Performance measures are indicators to help guideline users
gauge potential effects and beneﬁts of implementation of theguidelines. Such tools can be indicators of the actual process,short-term and long-term outcomes, or both. Deviations fromthe recommendations are expected in a proportion of cases, andcompliance in 80%–95% of cases is generally appropriate, de-pending on the measure. The following measures were identiﬁedas appropriate indicators for management of acute un-
complicated UTI in women.
dUse of a recommended antimicrobial for treatment of
uncomplicated cystitis in cases in which it is not prohibited
because of allergy history or availability
dUse of ﬂuoroquinolones for treatment of acute uncomplicated
cystitis only when a recommended antimicrobial cannot be used
dUse of a recommended antimicrobial for treatment of
uncomplicated pyelonephritis in cases in which it is not
prohibited because of allergy history or availability
dInitiation of empirical therapy for acute uncomplicated
pyelonephritis with performance of a pretherapy urine culture and
modiﬁcation of empirical therapy as indicated by culture results
Acknowledgments
The Expert Panel dedicates this guideline to the memory of Dr. Walter E.
Stamm, whose work and commitment over several decades enhanced ourunderstanding of the pathogenesis, epidemiology, and management of urinary
tract infections in women. We honor him as a colleague, mentor, and leader.The Expert Panel wishes to express its gratitude to the IDSA staff for
administrative assistance and external reviewers Drs Patricia Brown, Jack
Sobel, and John Warren for thoughtful advice.
Financial support. The Infectious Diseases Society of America.
Potential conﬂicts of interest. K.G. (Chair) has served as a consultant
to Pﬁzer and Pinnacle Pharmaceutical. A.J.S. has served as a consultant toNovabay Pharmaceuticals, Pﬁzer, Propagate Pharmaceuticals, Hagen/Sin-clair Research Recruiting, Swiss Precision Diagnostics Development
Company, and FlashPointMedica; has received honoraria from BMJ Group
(British Medical Journal) and Advanstar Communications; receiveda royalty payment from UpToDate; and received remuneration from theAmerican Urological Association. G.J.M. has served as a consultant to
Cerexa, Cubist, Eisai, Forest, Merck, Ortho-McNeil, Pﬁzer, and Schering-
Plough and has received honoraria from Cubist and Merck. K.G.N. hasreceived remuneration as consultant or speaker from Bionorica, Daiichi
Sankyo, Janssen Cilag, Johnson & Johnson, OM Pharma, Pierre Fabre,
Sanoﬁ Aventis, and Zambon and has received research grants from Mer-Lion Pharmaceuticals, Rosen Pharma, and OM Pharma. L.E.N. has servedas a consultant to Pﬁzer, Leo pharmaceuticals, Cerexa, and Johnson &
Johnson and served on the advisory board for Leo Pharmaceuticals and
Cerexa. L.G.M. has served as a consultant to Forest and Theravance Lab-oratories and received research grants from Cubist and Pﬁzer Pharma-ceuticals. T.M.H. has served as a consultant to Pﬁzer, Alita Pharmaceuticals,
and Pinnacle Pharmaceuticals All other authors: no conﬂicts.
References
1. Warren JW, Abrutyn E, Hebel JR, Johnson JR, Schaeffer AJ, Stamm
WE. Guidelines. for antimicrobial treatment of uncomplicated acutebacterial cystitis and acute pyelonephritis in women. nfectious Diseases
Society of America (IDSA). Clin Infect Dis 1999 ; 29:745–58.
2. Huang ES, Stafford RS. National patterns in the treatment of urinary
tract infections in women by ambulatory care physicians. Archives of
internal medicine 2002 ; 162:41–7.
3. Kahan NR, Chinitz DP, Kahan E. Longer than recommended empiric
antibiotic treatment of urinary tract infection in women: an avoidable
waste of money. Journal of clinical pharmacy and therapeutics 2004 ;
29:59–63.
4. Kallen AJ, Welch HG, Sirovich BE. Current antibiotic therapy for
isolated urinary tract infections in women. Archives of internal med-icine 2006 ; 166:635–9.
5. O’Connor PJ, Solberg LI, Christianson J, Amundson G, Mosser G.
Mechanism of action and impact of a cystitis clinical practice guidelineon outcomes and costs of care in an HMO. The Joint Commissionjournal on quality improvement 1996 ; 22:673–82.
6. Stamm WE. Evaluating guidelines. Clin Infect Dis 2007 ; 44:775–6.
7. Fosfomycin for urinary tract infections. Med Lett Drugs Ther 1997 ;
39:66–8. PMID: 9255237.
8. Kahlmeter G. An international survey of the antimicrobial susceptibility of
pathogens from uncomplicated urin ary tract infections: the ECO.SENS
Project. J Antimicrob Chemother 2003 ; 51:69–76.
9. Kahlmeter G. Prevalence and antimicrobial susceptibility of pathogens
in uncomplicated cystitis in Europe. The ECO.SENS study. Int J An-timicrob Agents 2003 ; 22(Suppl. 2):49–52.
10. Naber KG, Schito G, Botto H, Palou J, Mazzei T. Surveillance study in
Europe and Brazil on clinical aspects and Antimicrobial ResistanceEpidemiology in Females with Cystitis (ARESC): implications forempiric therapy. Eur Urol 2008 ; 54:1164–75.
11. Zhanel GG, Hisanaga TL, Laing NM, et al. Antibiotic resistance in
Escherichia coli outpatient urinary isolates: ﬁnal results from the North
American Urinary Tract Infection Collaborative Alliance (NAUTICA).Int J Antimicrob Agents 2006 ; 27:468–75.
12. Sundqvist M, Geli P, Andersson DI, et al. Little evidence for re-
versibility of trimethoprim resistance after a drastic reduction in tri-methoprim use. J Antimicrob Chemother 2010 ; 65:350–60.
e118 dCID 2011:52 (1 March) dGupta et alDownloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article/52/5/e103/388285 by MUSC Library user on 12 November 2025

13. Brown PD, Freeman A, Foxman B. Pr evalence and predictors of tri-
methoprim-sulfamethoxazole resist ance among uropathogenic Escher-
ichia coli isolates in Michigan. Clin Infect Dis 2002 ; 34:1061–6.
14. Metlay JP, Strom BL, Asch DA. Prior antimicrobial drug exposure:
a risk factor for trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole-resistant urinary tractinfections. J Antimicrob Chemother 2003 ; 51:963–70.
15. Burman WJ, Breese PE, Murray BE, et al. Conventional and molecular
epidemiology of trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole resistance amongurinary Escherichia coli isolates. Am J Med 2003 ; 115:358–64.
16. Colgan R, Johnson JR, Kuskowski M, Gupta K. Risk factors for
trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole r esistance in patients with acute
uncomplicated cystitis. Antimicrob Agents Chemother 2008 ; 52:
846–51.
17. Johnson L, Sabel A, Burman WJ, et al. Emergence of ﬂuoroquinolone
resistance in outpatient urinary Escherichia coli isolates. Am J Med
2008 ; 121:876–84.
18. Talan DA, Krishnadasan A, Abrahamian FM, Stamm WE, Moran GJ.
Prevalence and risk factor analysis of trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole-and ﬂuoroquinolone-resistant Escherichia coli infection among emer-
gency department patients with pyelonephritis. Clin Infect Dis 2008 ;
47:1150–8.
19. Miller LG, Tang AW. Treatment of uncomplicated urinary tract in-
fections in an era of increasing antimicrobial resistance. Mayo ClinProc 2004 ; 79:1048–53; quiz 1053–4.
20. Gupta K. Emerging antibiotic resistance in urinary tract pathogens.
Infect Dis Clin North Am 2003 ; 17:243–59.
21. Raz R, Chazan B, Kennes Y, et al. Empiric use of trimethoprim-sul-
famethoxazole (TMP-SMX) in the treatment of women with un-complicated urinary tract infections, in a geographical area with a highprevalence of TMP-SMX-resistant uropathogens. Clin Infect Dis 2002 ;
34:1165–9.
22. Paterson DL. "Collateral damage" from cephalosporin or quinolone
antibiotic therapy. Clin Infect Dis 2004 ; 38(Suppl. 4):S341–5.
23. Ramphal R, Ambrose PG. Extended-spectrum b-lactamases and clin-
ical outcomes: current data. Clin Infect Dis 2006 ; 42(Suppl. 4):
S164–72.
24. Graninger W. Pivmecillinam–therapy of choice for lower urinary tract
infection. Int J Antimicrob Agents 2003 ; 22(Suppl. 2):73–8.
25. Knothe H, Schafer V, Sammann A, Shah PM. Inﬂuence of fosfomycin
on the intestinal and pharyngeal ﬂora of man. Infection 1991 ;
19:18–20.
26. Mavromanolakis E, Maraki S, Samonis G, Tselentis Y. Effect of nor-
ﬂoxacin, trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole and nitroffurantoin on fecalﬂora of women with recurrent urinary tract infections. J Chemother1997 ; 9:203–7.
27. Sullivan A, Edlund C, Nord C. Effect of antimicrobial agents on the
ecological balance of human microﬂora. Lancet Infect Dis 2001 ;
1:101–14.
28. Christiaens TC, De Meyere M, Verschraegen G, Peersman W, Heytens
S, De Maeseneer JM. Randomised controlled trial of nitrofurantoinversus placebo in the treatment of uncomplicated urinary tract in-fection in adult women. Br J Gen Pract 2002 ; 52:729–34.
29. Ferry SA, Holm SE, Stenlund H, Lundholm R, Monsen TJ. Clinical and
bacteriological outcome of different doses and duration of piv-mecillinam compared with placebo therapy of uncomplicated lowerurinary tract infection in women: the LUTIW project. Scand J PrimHealth Care 2007 ; 25:49–57.
30. Linder JA, Huang ES, Steinman MA, Gonzales R, Stafford RS. Fluo-
roquinolone prescribing in the United States: 1995 to 2002. Am J Med2005 ; 118:259–68.
31. Field MJ, Lohr KN, eds. Institute of Medicine Committee to Advise the
Public Health Service on Clinical Practice Guidelines. Clinical practiceguidelines: directions for a new program. Washington, DC: NationalAcademy Press, 1990; 55–77.
32. Canadian Task Force on the Periodic Health Examination. The peri-
odic health examination. Can Med Assoc J 1979 ; 121(9);1193–254.33. Pimentel FL, Dolgner A, Guimaraes J, Quintas M, Mario-Reis J. Efﬁ-
cacy and safety of norﬂoxacin 800 mg once-daily versus norﬂoxacin
400 mg twice-daily in the treatment of uncomplicated urinary tract
infections in women: a double-blind, randomized clinical trial. J
Chemother 1998 ; 10:122–7.
34. Grabe M, Bishop MC, Bjerklund-Johansen TE, et al. Guidelines on
urological infections. In EAU Guidelines edition presented at the 25th
EAU Annual Congress, Barcelona 2010. ISBN 978-90-79754-70-0.
35. Arredondo-Garcia JL, Figueroa-Damian R, Rosas A, Jauregui A, Corral
M, Costa A, et al. Comparison of short-term treatment regimen of
ciproﬂoxacin versus long-term treatment regimens of trimethoprim/
sulfamethoxazole or norﬂoxacin for uncomplicated lower urinary tract
infections: a randomized, multicentre, open-label, prospective study. J
Antimicrob Chemother 2004 ; 54:840–3.
36. Gupta K, Hooton TM, Roberts PL, Stamm WE. Short-course nitro-
furantoin for the treatment of acute uncomplicated cystitis in women.
Arch Intern Med 2007 ; 167:2207–12.
37. Iravani A, Klimberg I, Briefer C, Munera C, Kowalsky SF, Echols RM. A
trial comparing low-dose, short-course ciproﬂoxacin and standard 7
day therapy with co-trimoxazole or nitrofurantoin in the treatment of
uncomplicated urinary tract infection. J Antimicrob Chemother 1999 ;
43(Suppl A):67–75.
38. Kavatha D, Giamarellou H, Alexiou Z, et al. Cefpodoxime-proxetil
versus trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole for short-term therapy of un-
complicated acute cystitis in women. Antimicrob Agents Chemother
2003 ; 47:897–900.
39. Stein GE. Comparison of single-dose fosfomycin and a 7-day course of
nitrofurantoin in female patients with uncomplicated urinary tract
infection. Clin Ther 1999 ; 21:1864–72.
40. Minassian MA, Lewis DA, Chattopadhyay D, Bovill B, Duckworth GJ,
Williams JD. A comparison between single-dose fosfomycin trometa-
mol (Monuril) and a 5-day course of trimethoprim in the treatment of
uncomplicated lower urinary tract infection in women. Int J Anti-
microb Agents 1998 ; 10:39–47.
41. Popovic M, Steinort D, Pillai S, Joukhadar C. Fosfomycin: an old, new
friend? Eur J Clin Microbiol Infect Dis 2010 ; 29:127–42.
42. Rodriguez-Bano J, Alcala JC, Cisneros JM, et al. Community infections
caused by extended-spectrum beta-lactamase-producing Escherichia
coli. Arch Intern Med 2008 ; 168:1897–02.
43. Nicolle LE, Madsen KS, Debeeck GO, et al. Three days of pivmecillinam
or norﬂoxacin for treatment of acute uncomplicated urinary infection
in women. Scand J Infect Dis 2002 ; 34:487–92.
44. Henry D, Ellison W, Sullivan J, et al. Treatment of community-ac-
quired acute uncomplicated urinary tract infection with sparﬂoxacin
versus oﬂoxacin. The Sparﬂoxacin Multi Center UUTI Study Group.
Antimicrob Agents Chemother 1998 ; 42:2262–6.
45. Henry DC, Nenad RC, Iravani A, et al. Comparison of sparﬂoxacin and
ciproﬂoxacin in the treatment of community-acquired acute uncomplicated
urinary tract infection in women. par ﬂoxacin Multicenter Uncomplicated
Urinary Tract Infection Study Group. Clin Ther 1999 ; 21:966–81.
46. Naber KG, Allin DM, Clarysse L, et al. Gatiﬂoxacin 400 mg as a single
shot or 200 mg once daily for 3 days is as effective as ciproﬂoxacin 250
mg twice daily for the treatment of patients with uncomplicated uri-
nary tract infections. Int J Antimicrob Agents 2004 ; 23:596–605.
47. Richard GA, Mathew CP, Kirstein JM, Orchard D, Yang JY. Single-dose
ﬂuoroquinolone therapy of acute uncomplicated urinary tract in-
fection in women: results from a randomized, double-blind, multi-
center trial comparing single-dose to 3-day ﬂuoroquinolone regimens.
Urology 2002 ; 59:334–9.
48. Fourcroy JL, Berner B, Chiang YK, Cramer M, Rowe L, Shore N. Ef-
ﬁcacy and safety of a novel once-daily extended-release ciproﬂoxacin
tablet formulation for treatment of uncomplicated urinary tract in-
fection in women. Antimicrob Agents Chemother 2005 ; 49:4137–43.
49. Henry DC Jr, Bettis RB, Riffer E, et al. Comparison of once-
daily extended-release ciproﬂoxacin and conventional twice-daily
Clinical Practice Guidelines dCID 2011:52 (1 March) de119Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article/52/5/e103/388285 by MUSC Library user on 12 November 2025

ciproﬂoxacin for the treatment of uncomplicated urinary tract in-
fection in women. Clin Ther 2002 ; 24:2088–104.
50. Vogel T, Verreault R, Gourdeau M, Morin M, Grenier-Gosselinl L,
Rochette L. Optimal duration of antibiotic therapy for uncomplicated
urinary tract infection in older women: a double-blind randomized
controlled trial. CMAJ 2004 ; 170:469–73.
51. Auquer F, Cordon F, Gorina E, Caballero JC, Adalid C, Batlle J. Single-
dose ciproﬂoxacin versus 3 days of norﬂoxacin in uncomplicated
urinary tract infections in women. Clin Microbiol Infect 2002 ; 8:50–4.
52. Hooton TM, Scholes D, Gupta K, Stapleton AE, Roberts PL, Stamm
WE. Amoxicillin-clavulanate vs ciproﬂoxacin for the treatment ofuncomplicated cystitis in women: a randomized trial. JAMA 2005 ;
293:949–55.
53. Hooton TM, Besser R, Foxman B, Fritsche TR, Nicolle LE. Acute un-
complicated cystitis in an era of increasing antibiotic resistance:
a proposed approach to empirical therapy. Clin Infect Dis 2004 ;
39:75–80.
54. Leigh AP, Nemeth MA, Keyserling CH, Hotary LH, Tack KJ. Cefdinir
versus cefaclor in the treatment of uncomplicated urinary tract in-
fection. Clin Ther 2000 ; 22:818–25.
55. Talan DA, Stamm WE, Hooton TM, et al. Comparison of ciproﬂoxacin
(7 days) and trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole (14 days) for acute un-complicated pyelonephritis pyelonephritis in women: a randomized
trial. JAMA 2000 ; 283:1583–90.56. Peterson J, Kaul S, Khashab M, Fisher AC, Kahn JB. A double-blind,
randomized comparison of levoﬂoxacin 750 mg once-daily for ﬁve
days with ciproﬂoxacin 400/500 mg twice-daily for 10 days for thetreatment of complicated urinary tract infections and acute pyelone-
phritis. Urology 2008 ; 71:17–22.
57. Talan DA, Klimberg IW, Nicolle LE, Song J, Kowalsky SF, Church DA.
Once daily, extended release ciproﬂoxacin for complicated urinarytract infections and acute uncomplicated pyelonephritis. J Urol 2004 ;
171:734–9.
58. Naber KG, Bartnicki A, Bischoff W, et al. Gatiﬂoxacin 200 mg or 400
mg once daily is as effective as ciproﬂoxacin 500 mg twice daily for thetreatment of patients with acute pyelonephritis or complicated urinary
tract infections. Int J Antimicrob Agents 2004 ; 23(Suppl. 1):S41–53.
59. Cronberg S, Banke S, Bergman B, et al. Fewer bacterial relapses after
oral treatment with norﬂoxacin than with ceftibuten in acute pyelo-
nephritis initially treated with intravenous cefuroxime. Scand J Infect
Dis 2001 ; 33:339–43.
60. Sanchez M, Collvinent B, Miro O, et al. Short-term effectiveness of
ceftriaxone single dose in the initial treatment of acute uncomplicated
pyelonephritis in women: a randomised controlled trial. Emerg Med J
2002 ; 19:19–22.
61. Czaja CA, Scholes D, Hooton TM, Stamm WE. Population-based ep-
idemiologic analysis of acute pyelonephritis. Clin Infect Dis 2007 ;
45:273–80.
e120 dCID 2011:52 (1 March) dGupta et alDownloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article/52/5/e103/388285 by MUSC Library user on 12 November 2025

