Circulatione368 November 30, 2021 Circulation. 2021;144:e368–e454. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000001029
Circulation is available at www.ahajournals.org/journal/circ*Writing committee members are required to recuse themselves from voting on sections to which their specific relationships with industry may apply; see Appendix 1 
for detailed information. †ACC/AHA Representative. ‡ACC/AHA Joint Committee on Clinical Practice Guidelines Liaison. §Society of Cardiovascular Computed 
Tomography Representative. ‖Lay Patient Representative. ¶Society for Academic Emergency Medicine Representative. #Former ACC/AHA Joint Committee member; 
current member during the writing effort. **Society for Cardiovascular Magnetic Resonance Representative. ††American College of Chest Physicians Representative. 
‡‡American Society of Echocardiography Representative. §§Task Force on Performance Measures, Liaison.
ACC/AHA Joint Committee on Clinical Practice Guidelines Members, see page e420.
The American Heart Association requests that this document be cited as follows: Gulati M, Levy PD, Mukherjee D, Amsterdam E, Bhatt DL, Birtcher KK, Blankstein R, 
Boyd J, Bullock-Palmer RP, Conejo T, Diercks DB, Gentile F, Greenwood JP, Hess EP, Hollenberg SM, Jaber WA, Jneid H, Joglar JA, Morrow DA, O’Connor RE, Ross 
MA, Shaw LJ. 2021 AHA/ACC/ASE/CHEST/SAEM/SCCT/SCMR guideline for the evaluation and diagnosis of chest pain: a report of the American College of 
Cardiology/American Heart Association Joint Committee on Clinical Practice Guidelines. Circulation. 2021;144:e368–e454. doi: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000001029 
© 2021 by the American Heart Association, Inc., and the American College of Cardiology Foundation. AHA/ACC CLINICAL PRACTICE GUIDELINE
2021 AHA/ACC/ASE/CHEST/SAEM/SCCT/
SCMR Guideline for the Evaluation and Diagnosis 
of Chest Pain: A Report of the American College 
of Cardiology/American Heart Association Joint 
Committee on Clinical Practice Guidelines
Writing Committee Members*
Martha Gulati, MD, MS, FACC, FAHA, Chair†; Phillip D. Levy, MD, MPH, FACC, FAHA, Vice Chair†;  
Debabrata Mukherjee, MD, MS, FACC, FAHA, Vice Chair†; Ezra Amsterdam, MD, FACC†; Deepak L. Bhatt, MD, MPH, FACC, FAHA†; 
Kim K. Birtcher, MS, PharmD, AACC‡; Ron Blankstein, MD, FACC, MSCCT§; Jack Boyd, MD†;  
Renee P. Bullock-Palmer, MD, FACC, FAHA, FASE, FSCCT†; Theresa Conejo, RN, BSN, FAHA‖ ; Deborah B. Diercks, MD, MSc, FACC¶; 
Federico Gentile, MD, FACC#; John P. Greenwood, MBChB, PhD, FSCMR, FACC**; Erik P. Hess, MD, MSc†;  
Steven M. Hollenberg, MD, FACC, FAHA, FCCP††; Wael A. Jaber, MD, FACC, FASE‡‡; Hani Jneid, MD, FACC, FAHA§§;  
José A. Joglar, MD, FAHA, FACC‡; David A. Morrow, MD, MPH, FACC, FAHA†; Robert E. O’Connor, MD, MPH, FAHA†;  
Michael A. Ross, MD, FACC†; Leslee J. Shaw, PhD, FACC, FAHA, MSCCT†
AIM: This clinical practice guideline for the evaluation and diagnosis of chest pain provides recommendations and algorithms 
for clinicians to assess and diagnose chest pain in adult patients.
METHODS : A comprehensive literature search was conducted from November 11, 2017 , to May 1, 2020, encompassing 
randomized and nonrandomized trials, observational studies, registries, reviews, and other evidence conducted on human 
subjects that were published in English from PubMed, EMBASE, the Cochrane Collaboration, Agency for Healthcare 
Research and Quality reports, and other relevant databases. Additional relevant studies, published through April 2021, were 
also considered.
STRUCTURE: Chest pain is a frequent cause for emergency department visits in the United States. The “2021 AHA/ACC/
ASE/CHEST/SAEM/SCCT/SCMR Guideline for the Evaluation and Diagnosis of Chest Pain” provides recommendations 
based on contemporary evidence on the assessment and evaluation of chest pain. This guideline presents an evidence-
based approach to risk stratification and the diagnostic workup for the evaluation of chest pain. Cost-value considerations in 
diagnostic testing have been incorporated, and shared decision-making with patients is recommended.
Key Words:  AHA Scientific Statements ◼ chest pain ◼ angina ◼ coronary artery disease ◼ acute coronary syndrome ◼ myocardial ischemia  
◼ myocardial infarction ◼ myocardial injury ◼ noncardiac ◼ accelerated diagnostic pathway ◼ clinical decision pathway ◼ sex differences  
◼ troponins ◼ chest pain syndromes ◼ biomarkers ◼ shared decision-making ◼ noncardiac chest pain ◼ cardiac imaging
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on November 12, 2025

Circulation. 2021;144:e368–e454. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000001029 November 30, 2021 e369
Gulati et al 2021 Chest Pain GuidelineCLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINESCONTENTS
Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . e368
Top 10 Take-Home Messages for the  
Evaluation and Diagnosis of Chest Pain . . . . . . . . . . . e370
Preamble  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . e370
1. Introduction  ................................. e372
1.1. Methodology and Evidence Review ...... e372
1.2. Organization of the Writing Committee . . . . e373
1.3. Document Review and Approval . . . . . . . . . . e374
1.4. Scope of the Guideline  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . e374
1.4.1. Scope of the Problem . . . . . . . . . . . . . e374
1.4.2. Defining Chest Pain  . . . . . . . . . . . . . e375
1.5. Abbreviations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . e376
2. Initial Evaluation  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . e377
2.1. History  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . e377
2.1.1. A Focus on the Uniqueness  
of Chest Pain in Women  . . . . . . . . . . e378
2.1.2. Considerations for Older  
Patients With Chest Pain . . . . . . . . . . e379
2.1.3.  Considerations for Diverse Patient 
Populations With Chest Pain . . . . . . . e379
2.1.4. Patient-Centric Considerations . . . e380
2.2. Physical Examination . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . e380
2.3. Diagnostic Testing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . e381
2.3.1. Setting Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . e381
2.3.2. Electrocardiogram . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . e382
2.3.3. Chest Radiography  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . e382
2.3.4. Biomarkers  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . e383
3. Cardiac Testing General Considerations . . . . . . . e384
3.1. Anatomic Testing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . e385
3.1.1. Coronary Computed  
Tomography Angiography  . . . . . . . . e385
3.1.2. Invasive Coronary Angiography . . . e385
3.2. Diagnostic Testing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . e386
3.2.1. Exercise ECG . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . e386
3.2.2. Echocardiography/Stress 
Echocardiography  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . e387
3.2.3. Stress Nuclear (PET or SPECT) 
Myocardial Perfusion Imaging . . . . . . e387
3.2.4. Cardiovascular Magnetic  
Resonance Imaging  . . . . . . . . . . . . . e387
3.3. Cardiac Testing Considerations for  
Women Who Are Pregnant, Postpartum,  
or of Child-Bearing Age  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . e387
4.  Choosing the Right Pathway With Patient- 
Centric Algorithms for Acute Chest Pain  . . . . . . . . e387
4.1. Patients With Acute Chest Pain and  
Suspected ACS (Not Including STEMI) . . . . . . e389
4.1.1. Low-Risk Patients With  
Acute Chest Pain . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . e392
4.1.1.1.  Cost-Value Considerations  
in the Evaluation of  
Low-Risk Patients  . . . . . . e393
4.1.2. Intermediate-Risk Patients  
With Acute Chest Pain . . . . . . . . . . . e3934.1.2.1. Intermediate-Risk Patients 
With Acute Chest Pain  
and No Known CAD . . . . . . . e394
4.1.2.1.1. Cost-Value 
Considerations . . . e395
4.1.2.2.  Intermediate-Risk Patients  
With Acute Chest  
Pain and Known CAD . . . e395
4.1.3. High-Risk Patients With  
Acute Chest Pain . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . e398
4.1.4. Acute Chest Pain in Patients  
With Prior Coronary Artery Bypass  
Graft (CABG) Surgery  . . . . . . . . . . e398
4.1.5. Evaluation of Patients With  
Acute Chest Pain Receiving  
Dialysis  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . e399
4.1.6. Evaluation of Acute Chest Pain 
in Patients With Cocaine and 
Methamphetamine Use  . . . . . . . . . e400
4.1.7 . Shared Decision-Making in  
Patients With Acute Chest Pain  . . . e400
4.2. Evaluation of Acute Chest Pain With 
Nonischemic Cardiac Pathologies . . . . . . . e401
4.2.1.  Acute Chest Pain With Suspected  
Acute Aortic Syndrome  . . . . . . . . . e401
4.2.2. Acute Chest Pain With  
Suspected PE . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . e402
4.2.3. Acute Chest Pain With  
Suspected Myopericarditis  . . . . . . e402
4.2.4. Acute Chest Pain With  
Valvular Heart Disease . . . . . . . . . . e403
4.3. Evaluation of Acute Chest Pain With 
Suspected Noncardiac Causes  . . . . . . . . . e404
4.3.1. Evaluation of Acute Chest  
Pain With Suspected  
Gastrointestinal Syndromes  . . . . . e405
4.3.2. Evaluation of Acute Chest  
Pain With Suspected Anxiety  
and Other Psychosomatic 
Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . e405
4.3.3. Evaluation of Acute Chest  
Pain in Patients With  
Sickle Cell Disease  . . . . . . . . . . . . . e406
5. Evaluation of Patients With Stable Chest Pain  . . . . . e406
5.1. Patients With No Known CAD  
Presenting With Stable Chest Pain . . . . . . e406
5.1.1. Pretest Risk Probability to  
Guide Need for Stress and  
Anatomic Tests . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . e406
5.1.2. Low-Risk Patients With Stable  
Chest Pain and No Known CAD . . . . . . e407
5.1.3.  Intermediate-High Risk Patients  
With Stable Chest Pain and  
No Known CAD  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . e408
5.2. Patients With Known CAD Presenting  
With Stable Chest Pain . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . e411
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on November 12, 2025

November 30, 2021 Circulation. 2021;144:e368–e454. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000001029 e370
Gulati et al 2021 Chest Pain GuidelineCLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINES5.2.1. Patients With Obstructive CAD Who 
Present With Stable Chest Pain . . . . . . e412
5.2.1.1. Patients With Prior Coronary 
Artery Bypass Surgery With 
Stable Chest Pain . . . . . . e414
5.2.2. Patients With Known Nonobstructive 
CAD Presenting With Stable Chest 
Pain . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . e415
5.2.3. Patients With Suspected Ischemia and 
No Obstructive CAD (INOCA) . . . e416
5.3. Cost-Value Considerations in Diagnostic 
Testing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . e418
5.3.1. CCTA and CAC Scanning Cost-Value 
Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . e418
5.3.2. Exercise Electrocardiographic Cost-
Value Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . e418
5.3.3. Stress Echocardiographic Cost-Value 
Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . e418
5.3.4. Stress Nuclear MPI Cost-Value 
Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . e419
5.3.5. Stress CMR Cost-Value 
Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . e419
6. Evidence Gaps and Future Research  . . . . . . . . . e419
References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . e421
Appendix 1
  Author Relationships With Industry and  
Other Entities (Relevant) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . e445
Appendix 2
  Reviewer Relationships With Industry and  
Other Entities (Comprehensive) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . e448
TOP 10 TAKE-HOME MESSAGES FOR THE 
EVALUATION AND DIAGNOSIS OF CHEST 
PAIN
1. Chest Pain Means More Than Pain in the 
Chest. Pain, pressure, tightness, or discomfort in 
the chest, shoulders, arms, neck, back, upper abdo-
men, or jaw, as well as shortness of breath and 
fatigue should all be considered anginal equivalents.
2. High-Sensitivity Troponins Preferred. High-
sensitivity cardiac troponins are the preferred 
standard for establishing a biomarker diagnosis of 
acute myocardial infarction, allowing for more accu-
rate detection and exclusion of myocardial injury.
3. Early Care for Acute Symptoms. Patients 
with acute chest pain or chest pain equivalent 
symptoms should seek medical care immediately 
by calling 9-1-1. Although most patients will not 
have a cardiac cause, the evaluation of all patients 
should focus on the early identification or exclusion 
of life-threatening causes.
4. Share the Decision-Making. Clinically stable 
patients presenting with chest pain should be 
included in decision-making; information about risk of adverse events, radiation exposure, costs, and 
alternative options should be provided to facilitate 
the discussion.
5. Testing Not Needed Routinely for Low-Risk 
Patients. For patients with acute or stable chest 
pain determined to be low risk, urgent diagnostic 
testing for suspected coronary artery disease is 
not needed.
6. Pathways. Clinical decision pathways for chest 
pain in the emergency department and outpatient 
settings should be used routinely.
7. Accompanying Symptoms. Chest pain is the 
dominant and most frequent symptom for both 
men and women ultimately diagnosed with acute 
coronary syndrome. Women may be more likely 
to present with accompanying symptoms such as 
nausea and shortness of breath.
8. Identify Patients Most Likely to Benefit 
From Further Testing. Patients with acute or 
stable chest pain who are at intermediate risk or 
intermediate to high pre-test risk of obstructive 
coronary artery disease, respectively, will benefit 
the most from cardiac imaging and testing.
9. Noncardiac Is In. Atypical Is Out. “Noncardiac” 
should be used if heart disease is not suspected. 
“Atypical” is a misleading descriptor of chest pain, 
and its use is discouraged.
10. Structured Risk Assessment Should Be 
Used. For patients presenting with acute or stable 
chest pain, risk for coronary artery disease and 
adverse events should be estimated using evi-
dence-based diagnostic protocols.
Figure 1 illustrates the take-home messages.
PREAMBLE
Since 1980, the American College of Cardiology (ACC) 
and American Heart Association (AHA) have translated 
scientific evidence into clinical practice guidelines with 
recommendations to improve cardiovascular health. 
These guidelines, which are based on systematic meth-
ods to evaluate and classify evidence, provide a founda-
tion for the delivery of quality cardiovascular care. The 
ACC and AHA sponsor the development and publication 
of clinical practice guidelines without commercial sup-
port, and members volunteer their time to the writing and 
review efforts. Guidelines are official policy of the ACC 
and AHA. For some guidelines, the ACC and AHA part-
ner with other organizations.
Intended Use
Clinical practice guidelines provide recommendations 
applicable to patients with or at risk of developing 
cardiovascular disease. The focus is on medical practice 
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on November 12, 2025

Circulation. 2021;144:e368–e454. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000001029 November 30, 2021 e371
Gulati et al 2021 Chest Pain GuidelineCLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINESin the United States, but these guidelines are relevant to 
patients throughout the world. Although guidelines may 
be used to inform regulatory or payer decisions, the in-
tent is to improve quality of care and align with patients’ 
interests. Guidelines are intended to define practices 
meeting the needs of patients in most, but not all, cir-
cumstances and should not replace clinical judgment.
Clinical Implementation
Management, in accordance with guideline recom-
mendations, is effective only when followed by both 
practitioners and patients. Adherence to recommen-
dations can be enhanced by shared decision-making 
between clinicians and patients, with patient engage-
ment in selecting interventions on the basis of indi-
vidual values, preferences, and associated conditions 
and comorbidities.Methodology and Modernization
The ACC/AHA Joint Committee on Clinical Practice 
Guidelines (Joint Committee) continuously reviews, up-
dates, and modifies guideline methodology on the basis 
of published standards from organizations, including the 
Institute of Medicine,1,2 and on the basis of internal re-
evaluation. Similarly, presentation and delivery of guide-
lines are reevaluated and modified in response to evolv-
ing technologies and other factors to optimally facilitate 
dissemination of information to healthcare professionals 
at the point of care.
Numerous modifications to the guidelines have been 
implemented to make them shorter and enhance “user 
friendliness.” Guidelines are written and presented in a 
modular, “knowledge chunk” format, in which each chunk 
includes a table of recommendations, a brief synopsis, 
recommendation-specific supportive text and, when 
Figure 1. Take-Home Messages for the Evaluation and Diagnosis of Chest Pain
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on November 12, 2025

November 30, 2021 Circulation. 2021;144:e368–e454. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000001029 e372
Gulati et al 2021 Chest Pain GuidelineCLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINESappropriate, flow diagrams or additional tables. Hyper-
linked references are provided for each modular knowl-
edge chunk to facilitate quick access and review.
In recognition of the importance of cost–value con-
siderations, in certain guidelines, when appropriate and 
feasible, an analysis of value for a drug, device, or inter-
vention may be performed in accordance with the ACC/
AHA methodology.3
To ensure that guideline recommendations remain 
current, new data will be reviewed on an ongoing basis 
by the writing committee and staff. Going forward, tar-
geted sections/knowledge chunks will be revised 
dynamically after publication and timely peer review of 
potentially practice-changing science. The previous des-
ignations of “full revision” and “focused update” will be 
phased out. For additional information and policies on 
guideline development, readers may consult the ACC/
AHA guideline methodology manual4 and other method-
ology articles.5-7 The Class of Recommendation (COR) 
indicates the strength of recommendation, encompass-
ing the estimated magnitude and certainty of benefit in 
proportion to risk. The Level of Evidence (LOE) rates the 
quality of scientific evidence supporting the intervention 
on the basis of the type, quantity, and consistency of data 
from clinical trials and other sources (Table 1).4
Selection of Writing Committee Members
The Joint Committee strives to ensure that the guide-
line writing committee contains requisite content exper-
tise and is representative of the broader cardiovascular 
community by selection of experts across a spectrum of 
backgrounds, representing different geographic regions, 
sexes, races, ethnicities, intellectual perspectives/biases, 
and clinical practice settings. Organizations and profes-
sional societies with related interests and expertise are 
invited to participate as partners or collaborators.
Relationships With Industry and Other Entities
The ACC and AHA have rigorous policies and methods 
to ensure that documents are developed without bias or 
improper influence. The complete policy on relationships 
with industry and other entities (RWI) can be found online. 
Appendix 1 of the guideline lists writing committee mem-
bers’ relevant RWI; for the purposes of full transparency, 
their comprehensive disclosure information is available in 
the Supplemental Appendix. Comprehensive disclosure in-
formation for the Joint Committee is also available online.
Evidence Review and Evidence Review 
Committees
In developing recommendations, the writing committee 
uses evidence-based methodologies that are based on all 
available data.4,5 Literature searches focus on randomized controlled trials (RCTs) but also include registries, nonran-
domized comparative and descriptive studies, case series, 
cohort studies, systematic reviews, and expert opinions. 
Only key references are cited.
An independent evidence review committee is com-
missioned when there are ≥ 1 questions deemed of 
utmost clinical importance and merit formal systematic 
review to determine which patients are most likely to ben-
efit from a drug, device, or treatment strategy, and to what 
degree. Criteria for commissioning an evidence review 
committee and formal systematic review include absence 
of a current authoritative systematic review, feasibility of 
defining the benefit and risk in a time frame consistent 
with the writing of a guideline, relevance to a substantial 
number of patients, and likelihood that the findings can 
be translated into actionable recommendations. Evidence 
review committee members may include methodologists, 
epidemiologists, clinicians, and biostatisticians. Recom-
mendations developed by the writing committee on the 
basis of the systematic review are marked “SR.”
Guideline-Directed Management and Therapy
The term guideline-directed medical therapy (GDMT) 
encompasses clinical evaluation, diagnostic testing, and 
both pharmacological and procedural treatments. For 
these and all recommended drug treatment regimens, the 
reader should confirm dosage with product insert material 
and evaluate for contraindications and interactions. Rec-
ommendations are limited to drugs, devices, and treat-
ments approved for clinical use in the United States.
Patrick T. O’Gara, MD, MACC, FAHA
Chair, ACC/AHA Joint Committee on  
Clinical Practice Guidelines
1. INTRODUCTION
1.1. Methodology and Evidence Review
The recommendations listed in this guideline are, 
whenever possible, evidence based. An initial exten-
sive evidence review, which included literature derived 
from research involving human subjects, published in 
English, and indexed in MEDLINE (through PubMed), 
EMBASE, the Cochrane Library, the Agency for 
Healthcare Research and Quality, and other selected 
databases relevant to this guideline, was conducted 
from November 11, 2017 , to May 1, 2020. Key search 
words included but were not limited to the follow-
ing: acute coronary syndrome, angina, angina pectoris, 
aortic valve stenosis, biomarker, biomarkers, brain na-
triuretic peptide, cardiac-gated single photon emission 
computer-assisted tomography, cardiovascular mag-
netic resonance, chest pain, CKMB, coronary angiogra-
phy, coronary arteriosclerosis, coronary artery disease, 
creatine kinase, creatine kinase MB, echocardiography, 
electrocardiography, heart valve disease, hypertrophic 
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on November 12, 2025

Circulation. 2021;144:e368–e454. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000001029 November 30, 2021 e373
Gulati et al 2021 Chest Pain GuidelineCLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINEScardiomyopathy, magnetic resonance imaging, mitral 
valve stenosis, multidetector computed tomography, 
myocardial infarction, myocardial ischemia, myocardi-
um, NT-proBNP, perfusion imaging, positron-emission 
tomography, pulmonary hypertension, stable angina, 
troponin I, troponin T, unstable angina, x-ray comput-
ed tomography. Additional relevant studies, published 
through November 2020 during the guideline writing 
process, were also considered by the writing commit-
tee and added to the evidence tables when appropri-
ate. The final evidence tables are included in the Online 
Data Supplement and summarize the evidence used 
by the writing committee to formulate recommenda-
tions. References selected and published in the pres-
ent document are representative and not all-inclusive.1.2. Organization of the Writing Committee
The writing committee consisted of cardiac intensivists, 
cardiac interventionalists, cardiac surgeons, cardiologists, 
emergency physicians, epidemiologists, and a lay/patient 
representative. The writing committee included represen-
tatives from the ACC, AHA, American Society of Echocar-
diography (ASE), American College of Chest Physicians 
(CHEST), Society for Academic Emergency Medicine 
(SAEM), Society of Cardiovascular Computed Tomography 
(SCCT), and Society for Cardiovascular Magnetic Reso-
nance (SCMR). Appendix 1 lists writing committee mem-
bers’ relevant RWI. For the purposes of full transparency, 
the writing committee members’ comprehensive disclosure 
information is available in the Supplemental Appendix.Table 1. Applying ACC/AHA Class of Recommendation and Level of Evidence to Clinical Strategies, Interventions, Treatments, 
or Diagnostic Testing in Patient Care (Updated May 2019)*
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on November 12, 2025

November 30, 2021 Circulation. 2021;144:e368–e454. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000001029 e374
Gulati et al 2021 Chest Pain GuidelineCLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINES1.3. Document Review and Approval
This document was reviewed by 16 official reviewers 
nominated by the ACC, the American College of Emer-
gency Physicians, AHA, ASE, American Society of Nu-
clear Cardiology, CHEST, SAEM, SCCT, and SCMR, and 
39 individual content reviewers. Reviewers’ RWI informa-
tion was distributed to the writing committee and is pub-
lished in this document (Appendix 2).
This document was approved for publication by the 
governing bodies of the ACC and the AHA and was 
endorsed by the ASE, CHEST, SAEM, SCCT, and SCMR.
1.4. Scope of the Guideline
The charge of the writing committee was to develop a 
guideline for the evaluation of acute or stable chest pain or 
other anginal equivalents, in various clinical settings, with an emphasis on the diagnosis on ischemic causes. This guide-
line will not provide recommendations on whether revascu-
larization is appropriate or what modality is indicated. Such 
recommendations can be found in the forthcoming ACC/
AHA coronary artery revascularization guideline. In devel-
oping the “2021 AHA/ACC/ASE/CHEST/SAEM/SCCT/
SCMR Guideline for the Evaluation and Diagnosis of Chest 
Pain,” the writing committee first reviewed previous pub-
lished guidelines and related statements. Table 2 contains 
a list of these publications deemed pertinent to this writing 
effort and is intended for use as a resource, thus obviating 
the need to repeat existing guideline recommendations.
1.4.1. Scope of the Problem
Synopsis
After injuries, chest pain is the second most com-
mon reason for adults to present to the emergency Table 2. Associated Guidelines and Statements
Title OrganizationPublication Year 
(Reference)
Guidelines
Stable ischemic heart disease ACC/AHA/AATS/PCNA/SCAI/STS 20141*
20122
Atrial fibrillation AHA/ACC/HRS 20143*
20194
Non-ST elevation ACS AHA/ACC 20145
Blood cholesterol AHA/ACC/AACVPR/AAPA/ABC/ACPM/ADA/
AGS/APhA/ASPC/NLA/PCNA20186
Heart failure ACC/AHA 20137*
20178
Primary prevention of cardiovascular disease ACC/AHA 20199
Management of overweight and obesity in adults AHA/ACC/TOS 201410
ST-elevation myocardial infarction ACC/AHA 201311
Ventricular arrhythmias and the prevention of sudden cardiac death AHA/ACC/HRS 201712
Coronary artery bypass graft surgery ACC/AHA 201113
Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy ACC/AHA 202014
Percutaneous coronary intervention ACC/AHA/SCAI 201115*
201516
Secondary prevention and risk reduction therapy for patients with coronary and other 
atherosclerotic vascular diseaseAHA/ACC 201117
Guidelines for cardiopulmonary resuscitation and emergency cardiovascular care—part 9: 
postcardiac arrest careAHA 201018*
201919
Prevention, detection, evaluation, and management of high blood pressure in adults ACC/AHA/AAPA/ABC/ACPM/AGS/APhA/
ASH/ASPC/NMA/PCNA201720
Statements
Testing of low-risk patients presenting to the emergency department with chest pain AHA 201021
Prevention of cardiovascular disease in adults with type 2 diabetes mellitus AHA/ADA 201522
Prevention and control of seasonal influenza with vaccines CDC 201823
AACVPR indicates American Association of Cardiovascular and Pulmonary Rehabilitation; AAPA, American Academy of Physician Assistants; AATS, American 
Association for Thoracic Surgery; ABC, Association of Black Cardiologists; ACC, American College of Cardiology; ACPM, American College of Preventive Medicine; 
ADA, American Diabetes Association; AGS, American Geriatrics Society; AHA, American Heart Association; APhA, American Pharmacists Association; ASH, American 
Society of Hypertension; ASPC, American Society for Preventive Cardiology; CDC, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention; ESC, European Society of Cardiology; 
HRS, Heart Rhythm Society; NHLBI, National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute; NLA, National Lipid Association; NMA, National Medical Association; PCNA, Preventive 
Cardiovascular Nurses Association; SCAI, Society for Cardiovascular Angiography and Interventions; STS, Society of Thoracic Surgeons; and TOS, The Obesity Society.
*The full-text guideline and focused update references are provided.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on November 12, 2025

Circulation. 2021;144:e368–e454. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000001029 November 30, 2021 e375
Gulati et al 2021 Chest Pain GuidelineCLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINESdepartment (ED) in the United States and accounts 
for >6.5 million visits, which is 4.7% of all ED visits.1 
Chest pain also leads to nearly 4 million outpatient vis-
its annually in the United States.2 Chest pain remains a 
diagnostic challenge in the ED and outpatient setting 
and requires thorough clinical evaluation. Although 
the cause of chest pain is often noncardiac, coronary 
artery disease (CAD) affects >18.2 million adults in 
the United States and remains the leading cause of 
death for men and women, accounting for >365 000 
deaths annually.3 Distinguishing between serious and 
benign causes of chest pain is imperative.  The life-
time prevalence of chest pain in the United States is 
20% to 40%,4 and women experience this symptom 
more often than men.5 Of all ED patients with chest 
pain, only 5.1% will have an acute coronary syndrome 
(ACS), and more than half will ultimately be found to 
have a noncardiac cause.6 Nonetheless, chest pain is 
the most common symptom of CAD in both men and 
women.
1.4.2. Defining Chest Pain
Recommendations for Defining Chest Pain
Referenced studies that support the recommendations are 
summarized in Online Data Supplements 1 and 2.
COR LOE Recommendations
1 B-NR1. An initial assessment of chest pain is 
recommended to triage patients effectively on 
the basis of the likelihood that symptoms may 
be attributable to myocardial ischemia.1-7
1 C-LD2. Chest pain should not be described as atypical, 
because it is not helpful in determining the 
cause and can be misinterpreted as benign in 
nature. Instead, chest pain should be described 
as cardiac, possibly cardiac, or noncardiac 
because these terms are more specific to the 
potential underlying diagnosis.Synopsis
Chest pain is one of the most common reasons that 
people seek medical care. The term “chest pain” is 
used by patients and applied by clinicians to describe 
the many unpleasant or uncomfortable sensations in 
the anterior chest that prompt concern for a cardiac 
problem. Chest pain should be considered acute when 
it is new onset or involves a change in pattern, inten-
sity, or duration compared with previous episodes in a 
patient with recurrent symptoms. Chest pain should be 
considered stable when symptoms are chronic and as-
sociated with consistent precipitants such as exertion 
or emotional stress.
Although the term chest pain is used in clinical prac-
tice, patients often report pressure, tightness, squeezing, 
heaviness, or burning. In this regard, a more appropriate 
term is “chest discomfort,” because patients may not use 
the descriptor “pain.” They may also report a location other 
than the chest, including the shoulder, arm, neck, back, 
upper abdomen, or jaw. Despite individual variability, the 
discomfort induced by myocardial ischemia is often char-
acteristic and therefore central to the diagnosis. For this 
reason, features more likely to be associated with isch-
emia have been described as typical versus atypical; how-
ever, the latter can be confusing because it is frequently 
used to describe symptoms considered nonischemic as 
well as noncardiac. Although other nonclassic symptoms 
of ischemia, such as shortness of breath, nausea, radiat-
ing discomfort, or numbness, may be present, chest pain 
or chest discomfort remains the predominant symptom 
reported in men and women who are ultimately diagnosed 
with myocardial ischemia.3-7 Pain—described as sharp, 
fleeting, related to inspiration (pleuritic) or position, or 
shifting locations—suggests a lower likelihood of ischemia.
Figure 2. Index of Suspicion That 
Chest “Pain” Is Ischemic in Origin 
on the Basis of Commonly Used 
Descriptors
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on November 12, 2025

November 30, 2021 Circulation. 2021;144:e368–e454. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000001029 e376
Gulati et al 2021 Chest Pain GuidelineCLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINESRecommendation-Specific Supportive Text
1. Like most visceral discomfort, the sensation pro-
duced by myocardial ischemia is characteristically 
deep, difficult to localize, and usually diffuse. Point 
tenderness renders ischemia less likely. Reported 
symptoms lie somewhere on a continuum of higher 
or lower probability of ischemia based on the pres-
ence or absence of specific characteristics (Figure 
2). Other clinical elements (eg, duration, provok-
ing and relieving factors, patient age, cardiac risk 
factors) provide further focus toward or away from 
ischemia in the diagnostic process. It is essential 
to ascertain the characteristics of the chest pain 
directly from the patient for optimal interpreta-
tion.1-7 A patient’s history is the most important 
basis for considering presence or absence of myo-
cardial ischemia, but the source of cardiac symp-
toms is complex, and their expression is variable. 
The diagnosis of ischemia may require data beyond 
history alone. In some patients, what appears to be 
noncardiac chest pain may be ischemic in origin.
2. Chest pain has been traditionally stratified into 
“typical” and “atypical” types. Chest pain that is more 
likely associated with ischemia consists of subster-
nal chest discomfort provoked by exertion or emo-
tional stress and relieved by rest or nitroglycerin. The 
more classic the chest discomfort is based on qual-
ity, location, radiation, and provoking and relieving 
factors, the more likely it is to be of cardiac ischemic 
origin. Atypical chest pain is a problematic term. 
Although it was intended to indicate angina with-
out typical chest symptoms, it is more often used to 
state that the symptom is noncardiac in origin. As 
such, we discourage the use of atypical chest pain. 
Emphasis is more constructively placed on specific 
aspects of symptoms that suggest their origin in 
terms of probable ischemia. Of note, chest pain is 
broadly defined to also include referred pain in the 
shoulders, arms, jaw, neck, and upper abdomen. To 
diminish ambiguity, use “cardiac,” “possible cardiac,” 
and “noncardiac” to describe the suspected cause 
of chest pain is encouraged.1.5. Abbreviations
Abbreviation Meaning/Phrase
ACS acute coronary syndrome
AMI acute myocardial infarction
CABG coronary artery bypass graft
CAC coronary artery calcium
CAD coronary artery disease
CCTA coronary computed tomographic angiography
CDP clinical decision pathway
CMR cardiovascular magnetic resonance
cTn cardiac troponin
ECG electrocardiogram
ED emergency department
EMS emergency medical services
FFR-CT fractional flow reserve with computed tomography
GDMT guideline-directed medical therapy
hs-cTn high-sensitivity cardiac troponin
ICA invasive coronary angiography
INOCA ischemia and no obstructive coronary artery disease
MACE major adverse cardiovascular events
MBFR myocardial blood flow reserve
METs metabolic equivalents
MINOCA myocardial infarction and nonobstructive coronary 
arteries
MPI myocardial perfusion imaging
NSTE-ACS non–ST-segment–elevation acute coronary syndrome
PCI percutaneous coronary intervention
PE pulmonary embolism
PET positron emission tomography
SIHD stable ischemic heart disease
SPECT single-photon emission computed tomography
STEMI ST-segment–elevation myocardial infarction
TEE transesophageal echocardiography
TTE transthoracic echocardiography
VF ventricular fibrillation
VHD valvular heart disease
VT ventricular tachycardia
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on November 12, 2025

Circulation. 2021;144:e368–e454. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000001029 November 30, 2021 e377
Gulati et al 2021 Chest Pain GuidelineCLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINES2. INITIAL EVALUATION
2.1. History
Recommendation for History
COR LOE Recommendation
1 C-LD1. In patients with chest pain, a focused history 
that includes characteristics and duration of 
symptoms relative to presentation as well as 
associated features, and cardiovascular risk 
factor assessment should be obtained.
Synopsis
Chest pain or chest pain equivalent will be referred to in 
these guidelines as “chest pain.” Patients presenting to the 
ED with nontraumatic chest pain are a frequent diagnostic 
challenge.1 The priorities are: 1) rapid initiation of optimal 
management in patients with life-threatening conditions 
such as ACS, aortic dissection, and pulmonary embolism 
(PE), as well as nonvascular syndromes (eg, esophageal 
rupture, tension pneumothorax); and 2) deliberate therapy 
for those with less critical illness. Although there are several 
life-threatening causes, chest pain usually reflects a more 
benign condition (Figure 3).2-4 The initial ECG is important 
to the evaluation, but history, examination, biomarkers, and 
other aids remain essential. There is frequently a lack of 
correlation between intensity of symptoms and seriousness 
of disease and general similarity of symptoms among differ-
ent causes of chest pain. A comprehensive history that cap-
tures all the characteristics of chest pain (Table 3), including but not limited to its: 1) nature; 2) onset and duration; 3) 
location and radiation; 4) precipitating factors; 5) relieving 
factors; and 6) associated symptoms can help better iden-
tify potential cardiac causes and should be obtained from 
all patients.
Recommendation-Specific Supportive Text
1. Angina pectoris is perceived as a retrosternal chest 
discomfort that builds gradually in intensity (over 
several minutes), is usually precipitated by stress 
(physical or emotional) or occurring at rest (as in 
the case of an ACS) with characteristic radiation 
(eg, left arm, neck, jaw) and its associated symp-
toms (eg, dyspnea, nausea, lightheadedness). 
When actively treated or spontaneously resolving, 
it dissipates over a few minutes. Relief with nitro-
glycerin is not necessarily diagnostic of myocardial 
ischemia and should not be used as a diagnostic 
criterion, especially because other entities dem-
onstrate comparable response (eg, esophageal 
spasm).1,5 Associated symptoms such as short-
ness of breath, nausea or vomiting, lightheaded-
ness, confusion, presyncope or syncope, or vague 
abdominal symptoms are more frequent among 
patients with diabetes, women, and the elderly. A 
detailed assessment of cardiovascular risk factors, 
review of systems, past medical history, and family 
and social history should complement the assess-
ment of presenting symptoms.
Figure 3. Top 10 Causes of Chest Pain in the ED Based on Age (Weighted Percentage)
Created using data from Hsia RY et al.3 ED indicates emergency department.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on November 12, 2025

November 30, 2021 Circulation. 2021;144:e368–e454. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000001029 e378
Gulati et al 2021 Chest Pain GuidelineCLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINES2.1.1. A Focus on the Uniqueness of Chest Pain 
in Women
Recommendations for a Focus on the Uniqueness of Chest Pain 
in Women
Referenced studies that support the recommendations are 
summarized in Online Data Supplements 3 and 4.
COR LOE Recommendations
1 B-NR1. Women who present with chest pain are at  
risk for underdiagnosis, and potential cardiac 
causes should always be considered.1-7
1 B-NR2. In women presenting with chest pain, it 
is recommended to obtain a history that 
emphasizes accompanying symptoms that 
are more common in women with ACS.1-7Synopsis
Most patients who present to the ED with chest pain are 
women, particularly among those ≥ 65 years of age.8 The 
ISCHEMIA (International Study of Comparative Health 
Effectiveness With Medical and Invasive Approaches) 
trial demonstrated that women with moderate-to-severe 
ischemia are more symptomatic than men.9 Women are 
less likely to have timely and appropriate care.10 This 
could be explained by the fact that women are more like-
ly to experience prodromal symptoms when they seek 
medical care.11 Women may also present with accompa-
nying symptoms (eg, nausea, fatigue, and shortness of 
breath) more often than men.12-14 However, chest pain 
remains the predominant symptom reported by women 
among those ultimately diagnosed with ACS, occurring 
with a frequency equal to men.3,5-7 ,15,16
Recommendation-Specific Supportive Text
1. Traditional risk score tools and physician assess-
ments often underestimate risk in women and 
misclassify them as having nonischemic chest 
pain.1,2 The PROMISE (Prospective Multicenter 
Imaging Study for Evaluation of Chest Pain) trial 
looked at sex differences in the presentation, risk 
factors, demographics, noninvasive test referrals, 
and results of 10 003 stable outpatients with sus-
pected CAD.1 Women commonly presented with 
chest pain symptoms similar to men but also had 
a greater prevalence of other symptoms such as 
palpitations, jaw and neck pain, as well as back 
pain. Women also had more cardiovascular risk 
factors, including hypertension (66.6% versus 
63.2%; P<0.001), hyperlipidemia (68.9% ver-
sus 66.3%; P=0.004), older age (62.4±7 .9 years 
of age versus 59.0±8.4 years of age, P <0.001), 
cerebral or peripheral artery disease (6.2% ver-
sus 4.7%; P <0.001), family history of premature 
CAD (34.6% versus 29.3%; P <0.001), and sed-
entary lifestyle (53.5% versus 43.4%; P <0.001). 
Physician assessments often misclassify chest 
pain as nonanginal. The BARI 2D (Bypass 
Angioplasty Revascularization Investigation 2 
Diabetes) trial reported that women with diabetes 
had a higher prevalence of angina than their male 
counterparts, with a lower functional capacity and 
a lower incidence of obstructive CAD.16
2. In the VIRGO (Variation in Recovery: Role of Gender 
on Outcomes of Young AMI Patients) study, men 
and women ≤55 years of age were equally likely to 
present with chest pain (defined as pain, pressure, 
tightness, discomfort; 89.5% versus 87%, respec-
tively). Women were more likely to report ≥ 3 associ-
ated symptoms than men (eg, epigastric symptoms, Table 3. Chest Pain Characteristics and Corresponding Causes
Nature
Anginal symptoms are perceived as retrosternal chest discomfort (eg, pain, 
discomfort, heaviness, tightness, pressure, constriction, squeezing) (Section 
1.4.2, Defining Chest Pain).
Sharp chest pain that increases with inspiration and lying supine is unlikely 
related to ischemic heart disease (eg, these symptoms usually occur with 
acute pericarditis).
Onset and duration
 Anginal symptoms gradually build in intensity over a few minutes.
 Sudden onset of ripping chest pain (with radiation to the upper or lower back) 
is unlikely to be anginal and is suspicious of an acute aortic syndrome.
 Fleeting chest pain—of few seconds’ duration—is unlikely to be related to 
ischemic heart disease.
Location and radiation
 Pain that can be localized to a very limited area and pain radiating to below 
the umbilicus or hip are unlikely related to myocardial ischemia.
Severity
 Ripping chest pain (“worse chest pain of my life”), especially when sudden 
in onset and occurring in a hypertensive patient, or with a known bicuspid 
aortic valve or aortic dilation, is suspicious of an acute aortic syndrome (eg, 
aortic dissection).
Precipitating factors
 Physical exercise or emotional stress are common triggers of anginal 
symptoms.
 Occurrence at rest or with minimal exertion associated with anginal symp-
toms usually indicates ACS.
 Positional chest pain is usually nonischemic (eg, musculoskeletal).
Relieving factors
 Relief with nitroglycerin is not necessarily diagnostic of myocardial ischemia 
and should not be used as a diagnostic criterion.
Associated symptoms
 Common symptoms associated with myocardial ischemia include, but are 
not limited to, dyspnea, palpitations, diaphoresis, lightheadedness, presyn-
cope or syncope, upper abdominal pain, or heartburn unrelated to meals 
and nausea or vomiting.
 Symptoms on the left or right side of the chest, stabbing, sharp pain, or 
discomfort in the throat or abdomen may occur in patients with diabetes, 
women, and elderly patients.
ACS indicates acute coronary syndrome.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on November 12, 2025

Circulation. 2021;144:e368–e454. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000001029 November 30, 2021 e379
Gulati et al 2021 Chest Pain GuidelineCLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINESpalpitations, and pain or discomfort in the jaw, neck, 
arms, or between the shoulder blades; 61.9% of 
women versus 54.8% of men; P <0.001).3 Similar 
results were found in the YOUNG-MI (Myocardial 
Infarction) registry where young men and women 
(≤50 years of age) were equally likely to present 
with chest pain, although women were more likely 
to also have other associated symptoms.7 The 
HERMES (Highly Effective Reperfusion Evaluated 
in Multiple Endovascular Stroke) study used car-
diolinguistic machine learning to record patient-
reported symptoms and, in those diagnosed with 
obstructive CAD, there was no sex difference in the 
occurrence of chest pain.6 In a prospective trial of 
1941 patients (39% women) with suspected ACS 
examining the diagnostic value of high-sensitivity 
cardiac troponin (cTn), chest pain was reported 
in 92% of women and 91% of men.5 Additionally, 
women with acute myocardial infarction (AMI) were 
more likely to present with “typical” symptoms than 
men (77% versus 59%; P =0.007).
2.1.2. Considerations for Older Patients With 
Chest Pain
Recommendation for Considerations for Older Patients With 
Chest Pain
COR LOE Recommendation
1 C-LD1. In patients with chest pain who are >75 years 
of age, ACS should be considered when 
accompanying symptoms such as shortness of 
breath, syncope, or acute delirium are present, 
or when an unexplained fall has occurred.1
Synopsis
Increased age is a significant risk factor for ACS. How-
ever, it is also a risk factor for comorbidities that are 
associated with alternative diagnoses associated with 
chest pain. As a result, a more extensive diagnostic 
workup is required in older patients. Although patients 
>75 years of age account for 33% of all cases of ACS, 
alternative diagnoses are still more common than a car-
diac cause of chest pain at presentation.2,3 A substudy of 
the PROMISE trial has shown that patients >75 years of 
age, with stable symptoms suggestive of CAD, are more 
likely to have a positive noninvasive test and more coro-
nary artery calcification than younger people. For these 
older patients, when compared with anatomic noninva-
sive testing for obstructive CAD with cardiac CT, a posi-
tive stress test result was associated with increased risk 
of cardiovascular death or MI.4
Recommendation-Specific Supportive Text
1. Patients >75 years of age may have symptoms of 
shortness of breath, syncope, mental impairment, or abdominal pain, or experienced an unexplained fall. 
The physician should have a heightened awareness 
to understand that these symptoms may be associ-
ated with ACS, in addition to chest pain.1
2.1.3. Considerations for Diverse Patient 
Populations With Chest Pain
Recommendations for Considerations for Diverse Patient Populations 
With Chest Pain
COR LOE Recommendations
1 C-LD1. Cultural competency training is 
recommended to help achieve the best 
outcomes in patients of diverse racial and 
ethnic backgrounds who present with chest 
pain.
1 C-LD2. Among patients of diverse race and ethnicity 
presenting with chest pain in whom English 
may not be their primary language, addressing 
language barriers with the use of formal 
translation services is recommended.
Synopsis
There are marked racial and ethnic disparities when triag-
ing patients who present for the evaluation of chest pain. 
Despite a greater number of Black patients presenting 
with angina pectoris relative to other races, this popula-
tion is less likely to be treated urgently and less likely to 
have an ECG performed, samples for cardiac biomarkers 
drawn, cardiac monitoring performed, or pulse oximetry 
measured.1-4 Similar treatment disparities are found with 
Hispanic patients and those who are covered by Medicaid 
or are uninsured. Derived from a nationally representative 
sample from the National Hospital Ambulatory Health Care 
Survey reflecting an estimated 78 million ED visits in the 
United States over a 10-year period, these findings have 
been unchanged over time.5 Such disparity in the manage-
ment of chest pain among diverse population subgroups 
contributes to worse outcomes, including the greater inci-
dence of AMI and fatal coronary events seen in these key 
population subgroups.6,7 There are also disparities in the 
management of patients of South Asian descent who pres-
ent with ACS, with the diagnosis often missed or delayed, 
resulting in poor outcomes.8-11 Consideration of race and 
ethnicity in the evaluation of patients with suspected ACS 
and in the outpatient evaluation of symptomatic patients 
is paramount to improving outcomes. Cultural competency 
training of providers is recommended to address health 
disparities in the evaluation and management of diverse 
patient population subgroups with chest pain.
Recommendation-Specific Supportive Text
1. In patients of various diverse groups presenting 
with chest pain, cultural competency training of 
providers to address racial and ethnic disparities 
may help to improve diagnosis, treatment, and 
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on November 12, 2025

November 30, 2021 Circulation. 2021;144:e368–e454. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000001029 e380
Gulati et al 2021 Chest Pain GuidelineCLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINESoutcomes. Attention to race, ethnicity, and socio-
cultural differences should be considered in the 
evaluation and management of such patients. 
Cultural competency training can help address 
difficulties in the assessment of patients because 
there may be differences in the description and 
perception of chest pain among various diverse 
patient groups. Such training may also help to min-
imize potential unconscious biases on the part of 
providers. Disparities in the management of chest 
pain among diverse populations contribute to 
worse outcomes, including the greater incidence 
of MI and fatal coronary events.1
2. In patients of various racial and ethnic subgroups 
presenting with suspected ACS in whom English 
may not be their primary language, adequately 
addressing language barriers with the use of lan-
guage translation is vital to obtain an accurate and 
complete history. Formal translation services such 
as those provided through institutions and virtual 
translation are recommended.
2.1.4. Patient-Centric Considerations
Recommendation for Patient-Centric Considerations
COR LOE Recommendation
1 C-LD1. In patients with acute chest pain, it is 
recommended that 9-1-1 be activated by 
patients or bystanders to initiate transport to 
the closest ED by emergency medical services 
(EMS).1
Synopsis
Although chest pain remains one of the most com-
mon reasons that patients seek evaluation, among both 
sexes, there is a tendency for some patients to minimize 
perceived risk for cardiac disease, resulting in poten-
tially avoidable delays in care.1 To alleviate this problem, 
efforts should be made to educate all people regarding 
their risk for a cardiac event and educate patients about 
the need for timely care if a heart attack is suspected. 
Education is essential regarding the need to call 9-1-1, 
provide transportation by EMS to the nearest ED, initiate 
early assessment and management of suspected ACS, 
including transmittal of prehospital ECGs,2 and intervene 
if complications occur en route to the ED.3 The ACC’s 
Early Heart Attack Care guide is a resource to help edu-
cate the public about early recognition of potential car-
diac symptoms and the importance of activating 9-1-1 
for transportation.4,5
Recommendation-Specific Supportive Text
1. To ensure the timely delivery of appropriate care, 
especially reperfusion therapy, it is strongly rec-
ommended that patients with acute chest pain be transported to the ED by trained EMS personnel.2,3 
EMS transportation is associated with substantial 
reductions in ischemic time and treatment delays. 
Moreover, 1 in 300 patients with chest pain trans-
ported to the ED by private vehicle suffers a car-
diac arrest en route.3 Understanding the mode of 
transportation to the ED for patients with chest 
pain and educating those who arrive by private 
vehicle on the associated dangers is an important 
aspect of management.
2.2. Physical Examination
Recommendation for Physical Examination
COR LOE Recommendation
1 C-EO1. In patients presenting with chest pain, a 
focused cardiovascular examination should 
be performed initially to aid in the diagnosis 
of ACS or other potentially serious causes 
of chest pain (eg, aortic dissection, PE, 
or esophageal rupture) and to identify 
complications.
Synopsis
Life-threatening causes of chest pain include, but are not 
limited to, ACS, PE, aortic dissection, and esophageal rup-
ture. Because ST-segment–elevation myocardial infarc-
tion (STEMI) can be recognized on the ECG, the major 
challenge is to distinguish between non–ST-segment–
elevation (NSTE)-ACS and noncardiac chest pain.1 With 
an uncomplicated AMI, the examination may be negative. 
Sudden onset of severe chest pain or back pain associ-
ated with limb pulse differential suggest aortic dissection,2 
but sensitivity of the latter finding alone was only 30%.3 PE 
may result in tachycardia, dyspnea, and accentuated P2. 
Noncoronary causes of chest pain include aortic steno-
sis, aortic regurgitation, and hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, 
which produces characteristic murmurs and pulse altera-
tions. Chest pain of pericarditis increases in the supine 
position and may be associated with a friction rub. Stress 
cardiomyopathy presents in a similar manner as ACS. 
Chest pain accompanied by a painful, tympanic abdomen 
may indicate a potentially life-threatening gastrointestinal 
etiology such as esophageal rupture.4 Pneumonia may 
cause localized pleuritic chest pain accompanied by a fric-
tion rub. Pneumothorax may be accompanied by pleuritic 
chest pain and unilateral absence of breath sounds. Ten-
derness to palpation of the costochondral joints may indi-
cate a musculoskeletal cause. Herpes zoster produces a 
painful rash in a dermatomal distribution.
Recommendation-Specific Supportive Text
1. Although the causes of chest pain are numer-
ous, the initial evaluation should focus on those 
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on November 12, 2025

Circulation. 2021;144:e368–e454. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000001029 November 30, 2021 e381
Gulati et al 2021 Chest Pain GuidelineCLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINESthat are life-threatening, such as ACS, PE, aortic 
dissection, and esophageal rupture, to facilitate 
rapid implementation of appropriate treatment.1 
Specific clues can be helpful (Table 4). Chest 
tenderness on palpation or pain with inspira-
tion markedly reduce the probability of ACS.1,5,6 
Integrating the examination with other elements 
of the evaluation is crucial to establishing the 
correct diagnosis.2.3. Diagnostic Testing
2.3.1. Setting Considerations
Recommendations for Setting Considerations
Referenced studies that support the recommendations are 
summarized in Online Data Supplement 5.
COR LOE Recommendations
1 B-NR1. Unless a noncardiac cause is evident, an ECG 
should be performed for patients seen in the 
office setting with stable chest pain; if an ECG 
is unavailable the patient should be referred to 
the ED so one can be obtained.1-5
1 C-LD2. Patients with clinical evidence of ACS or other 
life-threatening causes of acute chest pain 
seen in the office setting should be transported 
urgently to the ED, ideally by EMS.1-9
1 C-LD3. In all patients who present with acute chest 
pain regardless of the setting, an ECG should 
be acquired and reviewed for STEMI within 10 
minutes of arrival.1-3,6,7 ,10
1 C-LD4. In all patients presenting to the ED with 
acute chest pain and suspected ACS, cTn 
should be measured as soon as possible after 
presentation.8,9
3: Harm C-LD5. For patients with acute chest pain and 
suspected ACS initially evaluated in the office 
setting, delayed transfer to the ED for cTn or 
other diagnostic testing should be avoided.
Synopsis
The goals in patients presenting to the ED or office with 
acute chest pain are: 1) identify life-threatening causes; 
2) determine clinical stability; and 3) assess need for 
hospitalization versus safety of outpatient evaluation 
and management. These concerns entail consideration 
of the full extent of clinical data. The ACC/AHA STEMI 
and NSTE-ACS guidelines categorize chest pain cause 
into 4 types: STEMI, NSTE-ACS, stable angina, and non-
cardiac.6,7 The 12-lead ECG, which should be acquired 
and interpreted within 10 minutes of arrival to a medical 
facility1-7 ,11 (Section 2.3.2, ECG), is pivotal in the evalua-
tion because of its capacity to identify and triage patients 
with STEMI to urgent coronary reperfusion. Other ST-T 
abnormalities consistent with possible ischemia also 
mandate prompt evaluation in a hospital setting. In both 
cases, transfer should be by EMS; personal automobile 
for this purpose is associated with increased risk and 
should be avoided.3-5 Patients with stable angina or non-
cardiac chest pain that is not life-threatening should be 
managed as outpatients.
Recommendation-Specific Supportive Text
1. The ECG is central to the evaluation of stable 
angina in the office setting to ensure that ACS Table 4. Physical Examination in Patients With Chest Pain
Clinical Syndrome Findings
Emergency
ACS Diaphoresis, tachypnea, tachycardia, hypoten-
sion, crackles, S3, MR murmur.2; examination 
may be normal in uncomplicated cases
PE Tachycardia + dyspnea—>90% of patients; pain 
with inspiration7
Aortic dissection Connective tissue disorders (eg, Marfan syn-
drome), extremity pulse differential (30% of 
patients, type A>B)8
Severe pain, abrupt onset + pulse differential + 
widened mediastinum on CXR >80% probabil-
ity of dissection9
Frequency of syncope >10%8, AR 40%–75% 
(type A)10
Esophageal rupture Emesis, subcutaneous emphysema, pneumo-
thorax (20% patients), unilateral decreased or 
absent breath sounds
Other
Noncoronary cardiac: 
AS, AR, HCMAS: Characteristic systolic murmur, tardus or 
parvus carotid pulse
AR: Diastolic murmur at right of sternum, rapid 
carotid upstroke
HCM: Increased or displaced left ventricular 
impulse, prominent a wave in jugular venous 
pressure, systolic murmur
Pericarditis Fever, pleuritic chest pain, increased in supine 
position, friction rub
Myocarditis Fever, chest pain, heart failure, S3
Esophagitis, peptic ulcer 
disease, gall bladder 
diseaseEpigastric tenderness
Right upper quadrant tenderness, Murphy sign
Pneumonia Fever, localized chest pain, may be pleuritic, 
friction rub may be present, regional dullness to 
percussion, egophony
Pneumothorax Dyspnea and pain on inspiration, unilateral ab-
sence of breath sounds
Costochondritis, Tietze 
syndromeTenderness of costochondral joints
Herpes zoster Pain in dermatomal distribution, triggered by 
touch; characteristic rash (unilateral and derma-
tomal distribution)
ACS indicates acute coronary syndrome; AR, aortic regurgitation; AS, aortic 
stenosis; CXR, chest x-ray; LR, likelihood ratio; HCM, hypertrophic cardiomy-
opathy; MR, mitral regurgitation; PE, pulmonary embolism; and PUD, peptic 
ulcer disease.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on November 12, 2025

November 30, 2021 Circulation. 2021;144:e368–e454. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000001029 e382
Gulati et al 2021 Chest Pain GuidelineCLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINESis not missed.1,2,6,7 If an ECG cannot be obtained, 
transfer to the ED should be initiated.
2. Transfer by EMS from the office setting for acute 
chest pain with suspected ACS or other life-threat-
ing conditions is recommended because of the 
important advantages provided by EMS includ-
ing: 1) acquisition of a prehospital ECG, which can 
facilitate reperfusion if ST elevation is present; 2) 
presence of trained personnel who can provide 
treatment for chest pain, arrhythmias, and imple-
ment defibrillation en route; and 3) shorter travel 
time to the ED.1-7 ,10
3. Early recognition of STEMI improves out-
comes.1-3,6,7 Therefore, regardless of the setting, 
an ECG should be obtained and interpreted within 
10 minutes of arrival. If this cannot be achieved in 
the office setting, immediate transfer to the ED by 
EMS is recommended. A substantial proportion of 
patients with chest pain are transferred to the ED 
without a prehospital ECG.1-3,6,7 This results in an 
important and avoidable delay in readiness of the 
ED and reperfusion teams to implement optimally 
timed reperfusion therapy.1-7 ,10
4. cTn is the most sensitive test for diagnosing acute 
myocardial injury and, in conjunction with other 
essential clinical data (eg, history, examination, 
ECG), its measurement is necessary to implement 
appropriate therapy.8,9
5. Delayed transfer to the hospital for determination 
of cTn or other diagnostic testing beyond the ECG 
in the office setting can be detrimental and should 
be avoided.1-7 ,10
2.3.2. Electrocardiogram
Recommendations for Electrocardiogram
Referenced studies that support the recommendations are 
summarized in Online Data Supplement 6.
COR LOE Recommendations
1 C-EO1. In patients with chest pain in which an 
initial ECG is nondiagnostic, serial ECGs to 
detect potential ischemic changes should be 
performed, especially when clinical suspicion 
of ACS is high, symptoms are persistent, or the 
clinical condition deteriorates.1
1 C-EO2. Patients with chest pain in whom the initial 
ECG is consistent with an ACS should be 
treated according to STEMI and NSTE-ACS 
guidelines.1,2
2a B-NR3. In patients with chest pain and intermediate-
to-high clinical suspicion for ACS in whom 
the initial ECG is nondiagnostic, supplemental 
electrocardiographic leads V7 to V9 are 
reasonable to rule out posterior MI.3-5
Synopsis
Patients with chest pain and new ST-elevation, ST 
depression, or new left bundle branch block on ECG should be treated according to STEMI and NSTE-ACS 
guidelines.1,2,6 An initial normal ECG does not exclude 
ACS. Patients with an initial normal ECG should have 
a repeat ECG, if symptoms are ongoing, until other 
diagnostic testing rules out ACS. An ECG may identify 
other nonischemic causes of chest pain (eg, pericarditis, 
myocarditis, arrhythmia, electrolyte abnormalities, paced 
rhythm, hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, pulmonary hyper-
tension, congenital long QT, or normal variant). Figure 4 
depicts an algorithm for the role of the ECG to help 
direct care for individuals presenting with chest pain or 
chest pain equivalents.
Recommendation-Specific Supportive Text
1. When an ECG is nondiagnostic, it should be com-
pared with previous ECGs, if available.7 A normal or 
unchanged ECG is reasonably useful but not suf-
ficient at ruling out ACS.8-10 Thus, decision-making 
should not be based solely on a single normal or 
nondiagnostic ECG. Left ventricular hypertro-
phy, bundle branch blocks, and ventricular pac-
ing may mask signs of ischemia or injury.11 Up to 
6% of patients with evolving ACS are discharged 
from the ED with a normal ECG.12-17 In patients 
where the initial ECG is normal or is without ST 
elevation, hyperacute T waves, left bundle branch 
block, or ST depression, serial ECGs should be 
performed and management should be guided by 
new electrocardiographic changes or other diag-
nostic testing (see Section 2.3.4 on Biomarkers, 
Section 3.1 on Anatomic Testing, or Section 3.2 
on Stress Testing).7 ,18-20 The timing for repeat ECG 
should also be guided by symptoms, especially if 
chest pain recurs or a change in clinical condition 
develops.21
2. When ST-elevation is present on the initial ECG, 
management should follow the prescribed STEMI 
treatment algorithms in associated guidelines.2,22 
Furthermore, if ST depression is identified on the 
initial ECG, management should follow the NSTE-
ACS guidelines.1
3. A normal ECG may be associated with left circum-
flex or right coronary artery occlusions and poste-
rior wall ischemia, which is often “electrically silent”; 
therefore, right-sided ECG leads should be consid-
ered when such lesions are suspected.2-5
2.3.3. Chest Radiography
Recommendation for Chest Radiography
COR LOE Recommendation
1 C-EO1. In patients presenting with acute chest pain, 
a chest radiograph is useful to evaluate for 
other potential cardiac, pulmonary, and thoracic 
causes of symptoms.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on November 12, 2025

Circulation. 2021;144:e368–e454. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000001029 November 30, 2021 e383
Gulati et al 2021 Chest Pain GuidelineCLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINESSynopsis
Chest radiographs are rapid, noninvasive tests that can 
be used to screen for several disorders that may present 
with chest pain. The yield of chest radiography depends 
on the pretest probability and will thus be higher when 
history or physical examination point to a greater likeli-
hood of a given diagnosis. However, chest radiographs 
often do not lead to a diagnosis that requires interven-
tion,1 and their use should be guided by clinical suspicion.
Recommendation-Specific Supportive Text
1. The AHA/ACC guidelines for NSTE-ACS and 
heart failure all recommend chest radiographs on 
presentation, although this should not delay urgent 
revascularization if it is indicated.2,3 In patients with 
acute chest pain and heart failure, chest radio-
graphs are useful to assess heart size and pulmo-
nary congestion, as well as identifying potential 
pulmonary causes that may have contributed to 
symptoms. Chest radiographs may demonstrate a 
widened mediastinum in patients with aortic dis-
section, although they are not sensitive enough 
in this setting to rule out the diagnosis.4 Chest 
radiographs may be most useful in the evalu-
ation of patients with acute chest pain to detect alternative cardiac, pulmonary, or other conditions 
that may cause symptoms, including pneumonia, 
pneumothorax, or rib fractures. Pleural effusions, 
pulmonary artery enlargement, and infiltrates may 
suggest PE, which would need to be confirmed by 
further testing.
2.3.4. Biomarkers
Recommendations for Biomarkers
Referenced studies that support the recommendations are 
summarized in Online Data Supplement 7 .
COR LOE Recommendations
1 B-NR1. In patients presenting with acute chest pain, 
serial cTn I or T levels are useful to identify 
abnormal values and a rising or falling pattern 
indicative of acute myocardial injury.1-21
1 B-NR2. In patients presenting with acute chest pain, 
high-sensitivity cTn is the preferred biomarker 
because it enables more rapid detection or 
exclusion of myocardial injury and increases 
diagnostic accuracy.17 ,21-25
1 C-EO3. Clinicians should be familiar with the analytical 
performance and the 99th percentile upper 
reference limit that defines myocardial injury for 
the cTn assay used at their institution.23,26
3: No  
benefitB-NR4. With availability of cTn, creatine kinase 
myocardial (CK-MB) isoenzyme and myoglobin 
are not useful for diagnosis of acute myocardial 
injury.27-32
Figure 4. Electrocardiographic-Directed Management of Chest Pain
ECG indicates electrocardiogram; MI, myocardial infarction; NSTE-ACS, non–ST-segment–elevation acute coronary syndrome; and STEMI, ST-
segment–elevation myocardial infarction.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on November 12, 2025

November 30, 2021 Circulation. 2021;144:e368–e454. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000001029 e384
Gulati et al 2021 Chest Pain GuidelineCLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINESSynopsis
Cardiovascular biomarkers can be useful for the di-
agnostic and prognostic assessment of patients with 
chest pain. Their most important application in clinical 
practice is for the rapid identification or exclusion of 
myocardial injury. The preferred biomarker to detect 
or exclude myocardial injury is cTn (I or T) because 
of its high sensitivity and specificity for myocardial 
tissue.1-21,33 hs-cTn is preferred and can detect cir-
culating cTn in the blood of most “healthy” individu-
als, with different sex-specific thresholds.17 ,21,34 cTn 
is organ-specific but not disease-specific. Numer-
ous ischemic, noncoronary cardiac, and noncardiac 
causes of cardiomyocyte injury can result in elevated 
cTn concentrations.17 ,21,24,25 Therefore, interpretation 
of cTn results requires integration with all clinical in-
formation.17 ,21
Although multiple other cardiovascular biomarkers, 
including some in common clinical use such as natri-
uretic peptides, have been shown to be associated with 
the risk of adverse cardiovascular outcomes in patients 
with chest pain, none have sufficient diagnostic accu-
racy for myocardial injury to be recommended for that 
purpose. The use of D-dimer for diagnosis of PE is dis-
cussed in Section 4.2.2.
Recommendation-Specific Supportive Text
1. The preferred biomarker to detect or exclude 
cardiac injury is cTn (I or T) because of its high 
sensitivity and specificity for myocardial tissue.1-21 
Detection of myocardial cell injury, possibly indica-
tive of AMI, is predicated on a rise or fall of this 
biomarker in blood.1,3,4,10-21 A cTn concentration 
>99th percentile upper reference limit, which is 
assay-dependent, is an indicator of myocardial 
injury.1,9,21 The coefficient of variation at the 99th 
percentile upper reference limit for each assay 
should be ≤ 10%.8,21
2. There is ample evidence for the superiority of hs-
cTn assays over conventional cTn assays in mul-
tiple aspects of evaluation for patients presenting 
with chest pain with and without AMI.17 ,21,24,25,33 
The sensitivity and negative predictive values are 
greater with hs-cTn compared with previous gen-
eration assays.17 ,21,24,25 In addition, the time interval 
from onset of chest pain to a detectable con-
centration at patient presentation is shorter with 
hs-cTn, affording more rapid rule-in and rule-out 
algorithms.22 Although it is sometimes challenging 
to diagnostically discriminate among these causes 
of myocardial injury, irrespective of the final diag-
nosis, the presence of myocardial injury is associ-
ated with a higher risk of adverse outcomes among 
patients with chest pain.353. The level of detection, 99th percentile upper ref-
erence limit, analytical precision, and criteria for 
a significant delta are assay-specific, including 
among the many different manufacturers of the 
same analyte (eg, hs-cTnI). To appropriately apply 
a cTn assay, clinicians must be familiar with these 
analytical performance properties for the assay(s) 
that they use in their practice.21
4. Comparative studies have confirmed the superior-
ity of cTn over CK-MB and myoglobin for diagnosis 
and prognosis of AMI.27-32 The addition of CK-MB 
or myoglobin to cTn for evaluation of patients pre-
senting with chest pain is not beneficial.
3. CARDIAC TESTING GENERAL 
CONSIDERATIONS
For acute and stable chest pain, noninvasive and invasive 
diagnostic testing is a core component of the evalua-
tion underpinning its importance. Over the past decade, 
the quality of evidence supporting clinical indications 
for noninvasive testing has grown dramatically. The ap-
proach outlined in this guideline focuses on selective use 
of testing, optimization of lower cost evaluations, reduc-
ing layered testing, and deferring or eliminating testing 
when the diagnostic yield is low (Figure 5). Reducing un-
necessary testing can provide a means to exert cost sav-
ings within the diagnostic evaluation of populations.1 In 
the same manner, elimination of testing where evidence 
is lacking and the reduction in testing among low-risk 
patients for whom deferred testing is appropriate are 
emphasized in this guideline.
Testing choice will be influenced by site expertise and 
availability, but knowledge regarding which test may be 
preferable is useful when selecting between different 
modalities. Cost should also be considered, when known 
by the ordering clinician and there is equipoise between 
available modalities.2 The exercise ECG is the lowest 
cost procedure used in the diagnostic evaluation when 
compared with stress imaging or anatomic procedures, 
with the exception of coronary artery calcium (CAC) 
scoring (Figure 6). For all imaging procedures, costs vary 
by payer and site of services.
The following sections provide a brief overview of 
the various noninvasive tests available for use in the 
evaluation of symptomatic patients. Previously, the term 
known as CAD had been used to define those with 
a significant obstructive stenosis (ie, ≥ 50%). In this 
guideline, we revise the term known CAD to include 
patients with prior anatomic testing (invasive angiog-
raphy or coronary computed tomographic angiography 
[CCTA]) with identified nonobstructive atheroscle-
rotic plaque and obstructive CAD. We recognize this 
is a departure from convention, but our intent was to 
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on November 12, 2025

Circulation. 2021;144:e368–e454. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000001029 November 30, 2021 e385
Gulati et al 2021 Chest Pain GuidelineCLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINESensure that those with lesser degrees of stenosis who 
do not require coronary intervention but would benefit 
from optimized preventive therapy do not get over-
looked. However, throughout the document, the term 
“obstructive,” consistent with convention, will be used 
to indicate CAD with ≥ 50% stenosis and nonobstruc-
tive CAD will be used to indicate CAD <50% stenosis. 
In addition, the term “high risk CAD” is used to denote 
patients with obstructive stenosis who have left main 
stenosis ≥50% or anatomically significant 3-vessel dis-
ease (≥ 70% stenosis).
3.1. Anatomic Testing
3.1.1. Coronary Computed Tomography 
Angiography
CCTA can visualize and help to diagnose the extent 
and severity of nonobstructive and obstructive CAD, as 
well as atherosclerotic plaque composition and high-
risk features (eg, positive remodeling, low attenuation 
plaque).1-8 Calculation of fractional flow reserve with 
CT (FFR-CT) provides an estimation of lesion-specific 
ischemia.9 Current radiation dosimetry is low for CCTA, 
with effective doses for most patients in the 3 to 5 mSv 
range.10 CCTA contraindications are reported in Table 
5 Although in select situations imaging protocols that evaluate the coronary arteries, aorta, and pulmonary 
arteries may be useful, the general approach should 
be to use imaging protocols tailored to the most likely 
diagnosis, rather than a “triple rule out” approach (Fig-
ure 6).
3.1.2. Invasive Coronary Angiography
Invasive coronary angiography (ICA) defines the pres-
ence and severity of a luminal obstruction of an epicar-
dial coronary artery, including its location, length, and 
diameter, as well as coronary blood flow.1,2 For ICA, the 
primary goal is the characterization and detection of a 
high-grade obstructive stenosis to define feasibility and 
necessity of percutaneous or surgical revascularization. 
The use of physiologic indices (IFR and FFR) provides 
complementary functional information.1 Radiation expo-
sure to the patient during an interventional procedure 
averages 4 to 10 mSv and is dependent on procedural 
duration and complexity.3,4
ICA has a spatial resolution of 0.3 mm; as such, it is 
impossible to visualize arterioles (diameter of 0.1 mm) 
that regulate myocardial blood flow.5 Coronary vascular 
functional studies can be performed during coronary 
angiography. Normal angiography does not exclude 
abnormal coronary vascular function, and it is possible 
to assess coronary microcirculation and coronary vaso-
motion. Coronary function testing may assist in manage-
Figure 5. Chest Pain and Cardiac Testing Considerations
The choice of imaging depends on the clinical question of importance, to either a) ascertain the diagnosis of CAD and define coronary anatomy 
or b) assess ischemia severity among patients with an expected higher likelihood of ischemia with an abnormal resting ECG or those incapable 
of performing maximal exercise. ACS indicates acute coronary syndrome; CAC, coronary artery calcium; CAD, coronary artery disease; and ECG, 
electrocardiogram. Please refer to Section 4.1. For risk assessment in acute chest pain, see Figure 9. For risk assessment in stable chest pain, 
see Figure 11.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on November 12, 2025

November 30, 2021 Circulation. 2021;144:e368–e454. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000001029 e386
Gulati et al 2021 Chest Pain GuidelineCLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINESment of the underlying condition, in addition to providing 
prognostic information.6-8
3.2. Diagnostic Testing
3.2.1. Exercise ECG
Symptom-limited exercise ECG involves graded exer-
cise until physical fatigue, limiting chest pain (or dis-comfort), marked ischemia, or a drop in blood pres-
sure occurs.1 Candidates for exercise ECG are those: 
a) without disabling comorbidity (eg, frailty, marked 
obesity [body mass index >40 kg/m2], peripheral  
artery disease, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, 
or orthopedic limitations) and capable of performing 
activities of daily living or able to achieve ≥ 5 meta-
bolic equivalents of exercise (METs)2; and b) without 
Figure 6. Choosing the Right Diagnostic Test
ASCVD indicates atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease; CAD, coronary artery disease; CAC, coronary artery calcium; CCTA, coronary computed 
tomography angiography; CMR, cardiovascular magnetic resonance; ETT, exercise tolerance test; L V, left ventricular; MPI, myocardial perfusion 
imaging; PET, positron emission tomography and SPECT, single-photon emission computed tomography.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on November 12, 2025

Circulation. 2021;144:e368–e454. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000001029 November 30, 2021 e387
Gulati et al 2021 Chest Pain GuidelineCLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINESrest ST-T abnormalities (eg, >0.5-mm ST depression, 
left ventricular hypertrophy, paced rhythm, left bundle 
branch block, Wolff-Parkinson-White pattern, or digi-
talis use). Exercise electrocardiographic contraindica-
tions are reported in Table 5.
3.2.2. Echocardiography/Stress Echocardiography
Transthoracic echocardiography (TTE) can visualize and 
aid in the differential diagnosis among the numerous 
causes of acute chest pain such as acute aortic dissec-
tion, pericardial effusion, stress cardiomyopathy, and hy-
pertrophic cardiomyopathy.1,2 Although TTE does provide 
information, for patients with acute chest pain, visualiza-
tion of left and right ventricular function and regional wall 
motion abnormalities allows for the assessment of CAD 
risk and may help to guide clinical decision-making. Per-
formance of TTE at the bedside is ideal for patients with 
acute chest pain and can be done using point-of-care or 
handheld devices in institutions where such capabilities 
are available.
After ACS has been ruled out, stress echocardiog-
raphy can be used to define ischemia severity and for 
risk stratification purposes. For TTE and stress echo-
cardiography, ultrasound-enhancing agents are helpful 
for left ventricular opacification when ≥ 2 contiguous 
segments or a coronary territory is poorly visualized.3 
Coronary flow velocity reserve in the mid-distal left 
anterior descending coronary artery has been shown 
to improve risk stratification and may be helpful in the 
select patient with known CAD, including nonobstruc-
tive CAD.4-6 Contraindications to stress type (exercise 
versus pharmacologic) and stress echocardiography 
are reported in Table 5.
3.2.3. Stress Nuclear (PET or SPECT) Myocardial 
Perfusion Imaging
After ACS has been ruled out, rest/stress positron emis-
sion tomography (PET) or single-photon emission com-
puted tomography (SPECT) myocardial perfusion imag-
ing (MPI) allows for detection of perfusion abnormalities, 
measures of left ventricular function, and high-risk find-
ings, such as transient ischemic dilation.1-8 For PET, calcu-
lation of myocardial blood flow reserve (MBFR, the ratio 
of peak hyperemia to resting myocardial blood flow) adds 
diagnostic and prognostic information over MPI data.9-14 
Radiation exposure, as reported by an average effective 
dose, is ∼ 3 mSv for rest/stress PET with Rb-82 and ∼ 10 
mSv for Tc-99m SPECT; dual-isotope SPECT using thal-
lium is not recommended.15-17 SPECT/PET contraindi-
cations are and contraindications to type of stress test 
(exercise versus pharmacologic) are reported in Table 5.
3.2.4. Cardiovascular Magnetic Resonance Imaging
Cardiovascular magnetic resonance (CMR) imaging 
has the capability to accurately assess global and regional left and right ventricular function, detect 
and localize myocardial ischemia and infarction, and 
determine myocardial viability. CMR can also detect 
myocardial edema and microvascular obstruction, 
which can help differentiate acute versus chronic MI, 
as well as other causes of acute chest pain, includ-
ing myocarditis. CMR contraindications are reported 
in Table 5.
3.3. Cardiac Testing Considerations for Women 
Who Are Pregnant, Postpartum, or of Child-
Bearing Age
This guideline focuses on elective and urgent cardiac 
testing and, in both circumstances, imaging using ion-
izing radiation during pregnancy or postpartum while 
breast feeding should generally be avoided. When im-
aging is necessary to guide management, the risks and 
benefits of invasive angiography, SPECT, PET, or CCTA 
should be discussed with the patient. In all cases for 
a test deemed clinically necessary, the lowest effec-
tive dose of ionizing radiation should be used, including 
considerations for tests with no radiation exposure (eg, 
echocardiography, CMR imaging).1 Radiation risk to the 
fetus is very small. Iodinated contrast enters the fetal cir-
culation through the placenta and should be used with 
caution in a pregnant woman. The use of gadolinium 
contrast with CMR should be discouraged and used 
only when necessary to guide clinical management and 
is expected to improve fetal or maternal outcome.2-5 If 
contrast is needed for a postpartum woman, breastfeed-
ing may continue because <1% of iodinated contrast 
is excreted into the breast milk and absorbed into the 
infant’s gastrointestinal tract.6
4. CHOOSING THE RIGHT PATHWAY WITH 
PATIENT-CENTRIC ALGORITHMS FOR 
ACUTE CHEST PAIN
After initial evaluation, the next step is determining 
whether further diagnostic testing is needed to estab-
lish a diagnosis or formulate a disposition plan. In some 
cases, there is clearly minimal risk of a serious medical 
condition although, in others, uncertainty may remain. We 
provide guidance to help clinicians make this determina-
tion within the context of acute and stable chest pain 
presentations.
The initial assessment of patients presenting with 
acute chest pain is focused on the rapid identification 
of patients with immediately life-threatening conditions 
such that appropriate medical interventions can be 
initiated. Included among the potentially life-threatening 
(emergency) causes of chest pain are ACS (Section 
4.1), acute aortic syndromes (Section 4.2.1), and PE 
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on November 12, 2025

November 30, 2021 Circulation. 2021;144:e368–e454. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000001029 e388
Gulati et al 2021 Chest Pain GuidelineCLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINES(Section 4.2.2). Myopericarditis is heterogeneous in its 
manifestations but can include fulminant myocarditis, 
which carries a high mortality rate (Section 4.2.3). 
A subset of noncardiovascular syndromes are also 
immediately life-threatening, including esophageal 
rupture (Section 4.3.1), tension pneumothorax, 
and sickle cell chest crisis. Nonemergency causes 
of chest pain, such as costochondritis and other musculoskeletal, or gastrointestinal causes, are 
discussed in Section 4.3. Such nonemergency causes 
predominate among patients presenting with acute 
chest pain; therefore, strategies that incorporate 
routine, liberal use of testing carry the potential for 
adverse effects of unnecessary investigations and 
unnecessary cost. Figure 7 provides an overview of 
this approach.Table 5. Contraindication by Type of Imaging Modality and Stress Protocol
Exercise ECG Stress Nuclear1* Stress Echocardiography2-5Stress CMR6CCTA7*
  Abnormal ST changes on 
resting ECG, digoxin, left 
bundle branch block, Wolff-
Parkinson-White pattern, 
ventricular paced rhythm 
(unless test is performed to 
establish exercise capac-
ity and not for diagnosis of 
ischemia)
  Unable to achieve ≥5 METs 
or unsafe to exercise
  High-risk unstable angina or 
AMI (<2 d) ie, active ACS
  Uncontrolled heart failure
  Significant cardiac ar-
rhythmias (eg, VT, complete 
atrioventricular block) or high 
risk for arrhythmias caused 
by QT prolongation
  Severe symptomatic aortic 
stenosis
  Severe systemic arterial 
hypertension (eg, ≥200/110 
mm Hg)
  Acute illness (eg, acute PE, 
acute myocarditis/pericardi-
tis, acute aortic dissection)  High-risk unstable angina, 
complicated ACS or AMI 
(<2 d)
  Contraindications to vasodi-
lator administration
  Significant arrhythmias (eg, 
VT, second- or third-degree 
atrioventricular block) or si-
nus bradycardia <45 bpm
  Significant hypotension 
(SBP <90 mm Hg)
  Known or suspected 
bronchoconstrictive or 
bronchospastic disease
  Recent use of dipyridam-
ole or dipyridamole-con-
taining medications
  Use of methylxanthines 
(eg, aminophylline, caf-
feine) within 12 h
  Known hypersensitivity to 
adenosine, regadenoson
  Severe systemic arte-
rial hypertension (eg, 
≥200/110 mm Hg)  Limited acoustic windows 
(eg, in COPD patients)
  Inability to reach target heart 
rate
  Uncontrolled heart failure
  High-risk unstable angina, 
active ACS or AMI (<2 d)
  Serious ventricular ar-
rhythmia or high risk for ar-
rhythmias attributable to QT 
prolongation
  Respiratory failure
  Severe COPD, acute pulmo-
nary emboli, severe pulmo-
nary hypertension
  Contraindications to dobu-
tamine (if pharmacologic 
stress test needed)
  Atrioventricular block, un-
controlled atrial fibrillation
  Critical aortic stenosis†
  Acute illness (eg, acute PE, 
acute myocarditis/pericardi-
tis, acute aortic dissection)
  Hemodynamically significant 
LV outflow tract obstruction
  Contraindications to atro-
pine use:
  Narrow-angle glaucoma
  Myasthenia gravis
  Obstructive uropathy
  Obstructive gastrointestinal 
disorders
  Severe systemic arterial 
hypertension (eg, ≥200/110 
mm Hg)
Use of Contrast  
Contraindicated in:
  Hypersensitivity to perflutren
  Hypersensitivity to blood, 
blood products, or albumin 
(for Optison only)  Reduced GFR (<30 mL/
min/1.73 m2)
  Contraindications to vasodi-
lator administration
  Implanted devices not safe 
for CMR or producing ar-
tifact limiting scan quality/
interpretation
  Significant claustrophobia
  Caffeine use within past 
12 h  Allergy to iodinated contrast
  Inability to cooperate with 
scan acquisition and/or 
breath-hold instructions
  Clinical instability (eg, acute 
respiratory distress, severe 
hypotension, unstable ar-
rhythmia)
  Renal impairment as defined 
by local protocols
  Contraindication to beta 
blockade in the presence of 
an elevated heart rate and 
no alternative medications 
available for achieving target 
heart rate
  Heart rate variability and ar-
rhythmia
  Contraindication to nitroglyc-
erin (if indicated)
For all the imaging modalities, inability to achieve high-quality images should be considered, in particular for obese patients
ACS indicates acute coronary syndrome; AMI, acute myocardial infarction; AS, aortic stenosis; CCTA, coronary computed tomography angiography; CMR, cardio-
vascular magnetic resonance imaging; COPD, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease; GFR, glomerular filtration rate; LV, left ventricular; MET, metabolic equivalent; 
MRI, magnetic resonance imaging; PE, pulmonary embolism; SBP, systolic blood pressure; and VT, ventricular tachycardia. Readers should also review each imaging 
society’s guidelines for more details on test contraindications.1-14
*Screening for potential pregnancy by history and/or pregnancy testing should be performed according to the local imaging facilities policies for undertaking radio-
logical examinations that involve ionizing radiation in women of child-bearing age.
†Low-dose dobutamine may be useful for assessing for low-gradient AS.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on November 12, 2025

Circulation. 2021;144:e368–e454. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000001029 November 30, 2021 e389
Gulati et al 2021 Chest Pain GuidelineCLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINES4.1. Patients With Acute Chest Pain and 
Suspected ACS (Not Including STEMI)
Recommendations for Patients With Acute Chest Pain and Suspected 
ACS (Not Including STEMI)
Referenced studies that support the recommendations are 
summarized in Online Data Supplements 8 and 9.
COR LOE Recommendations
1 B-NR1. In patients presenting with acute chest pain 
and suspected ACS, clinical decision pathways 
(CDPs) should categorize patients into low-, 
intermediate-, and high-risk strata to facilitate 
disposition and subsequent diagnostic 
evaluation.1-14
1 B-NR2. In the evaluation of patients presenting with 
acute chest pain and suspected ACS for 
whom serial troponins are indicated to exclude 
myocardial injury, recommended time intervals 
after the initial troponin sample collection (time 
zero) for repeat measurements are: 1 to 3 
hours for high-sensitivity troponin and 3 to 6 
hours for conventional troponin assays.15-17
1 C-LD3. To standardize the detection and differentiation 
of myocardial injury in patients presenting 
with acute chest pain and suspected ACS, 
institutions should implement a CDP that 
includes a protocol for troponin sampling based 
on their particular assay.18,191 C-LD4. In patients with acute chest pain and suspected 
ACS, previous testing when available should be 
considered and incorporated into CDPs.20-24
2a B-NR5. For patients with acute chest pain, a normal 
ECG, and symptoms suggestive of ACS that 
began at least 3 hours before ED arrival, a single 
hs-cTn concentration that is below the limit of 
detection on initial measurement (time zero) is 
reasonable to exclude myocardial injury.13,25-29
Synopsis
Patients with acute chest pain and suspected ACS cover a 
spectrum of disease likelihood and stratification into low- 
versus intermediate- or high-risk groups once STEMI has 
been excluded (Figure 8). This stratification is important to 
guide subsequent management. Although most high-risk 
patients identified by CDPs should undergo cardiac cath-
eterization, these patients still require a clinical assess-
ment to determine if invasive evaluation is appropriate.
Chest pain risk scores provide a summative assess-
ment combining clinical information, such as age, ST 
Figure 7. Patient-Centric Algorithms 
for Acute Chest Pain
ECG indicates electrocardiogram; and 
STEMI, ST-segment–elevation myocardial 
infarction.
Recommendations for Patients With Acute Chest Pain and Suspected 
ACS (Not Including STEMI) (Continued)
COR LOE Recommendations
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on November 12, 2025

November 30, 2021 Circulation. 2021;144:e368–e454. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000001029 e390
Gulati et al 2021 Chest Pain GuidelineCLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINESsegment changes on ECG, symptoms, CAD risk fac-
tors, and cTn (Table 6) to estimate a patient’s probability 
of ACS or risk of 30-day major adverse cardiovascular 
events (MACE).30-35 Risk scores are essential when con-
ventional cTn assays are used. Based on emerging data, 
the hs-cTn result may be more predictive than other clini-
cal components of the risk score.36-43
Chest pain protocols are intended to add structure to 
the process of patient evaluation. Although various terms 
such as accelerated diagnostic protocols or disposition 
pathways have been used to describe such protocols, 
they can collectively be referred to as CDPs. CDPs are 
generally used to help guide disposition, but some also 
include guidance for cardiac testing of intermediate-risk 
patients.30,31,33,34
Compared with an unstructured clinical assessment, 
CDPs have been shown to decrease unnecessary testing 
and reduce admissions while maintaining high sensitivity 
for detection of acute myocardial injury and 30-day MACE 
(Table 6). The warranty period of prior cardiac testing should be considered when symptoms are unchanged (Table 7). 
Low-risk chest pain has been defined in Table 8.
Recommendation-Specific Supportive Text
1. CDPs that are based on cTn results have proven valid 
and useful in clinical practice.1-14 Use of unstructured 
assessment for clinical decision-making often leads to 
both under- and over-testing. To improve on this, pro-
tocols have been developed to rapidly detect (rule in) 
and to rapidly exclude or “rule out” acute myocardial 
injury, incorporating time-dependent serial cTn sam-
pling. Some protocols include chest pain risk scores 
while others do not. CDPs have been shown to help 
avoid admission or further testing in 21.3% to 43% of 
eligible patients and should be routinely used in clinical 
practice.31,45,50 To standardize the approach to patient 
care and ensure consistency in decision-making, 
CDPs should be implemented at the institution level. 
There are multiple CDPs from which to choose, and 
Figure 8. General Approach to Risk Stratification of Patients With Suspected ACS
ACS indicates acute coronary syndrome; CDP, clinical decision pathway; and ECG, electrocardiogram.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on November 12, 2025

Circulation. 2021;144:e368–e454. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000001029 November 30, 2021 e391
Gulati et al 2021 Chest Pain GuidelineCLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINESTable 6. Sample Clinical Decision Pathways Used to Define Risk
 HEART Pathway31EDACS44ADAPT 
(mADAPT)45NOTR342020 ESC/hs-cTn*46,472016 ESC/
GRACE11,38
Target population Suspected ACS Suspected 
ACS, CP >5 
min, planned 
serial tro-
poninSuspected 
ACS, CP >5 
min, planned 
observationSuspected 
ACS, ECG, 
troponin or-
deredSuspected ACS, stable Suspected ACS, 
planned serial tro-
ponin
Target outcome ↑ ED discharge without 
increasing missed 30-d or 
1-y MACE↑ ED dis-
charge rate 
without 
increasing 
missed 30-d 
MACE↑ ED discharge 
rate without in-
creasing missed 
30-d MACE↑ Low-risk clas-
sification with-
out increasing 
missed 30-d 
MACEEarly detection of AMI; 
30-d MACEEarly detection of 
AMI
Patients with primary 
outcome in study popu-
lation, %6–22 12 15 5–8 9.8 10–17
Troponin cTn, hs-cTn hs-cTn cTn, hs-cTn cTn, hs-cTn hs-cTn cTn, hs-cTn
Variables used History
ECG
Age
Risk factors
Troponin (0, 3 h)Age
Sex
Risk factors
History
Troponin (0, 
2 h)TIMI score 0-1
No ischemic 
ECG changes
Troponin (0, 2 h)Age
Risk factors
Previous AMI 
or CAD
Troponin (0, 
2 h)History 
ECG  
hs-cTn (0, 1 or 2 h)Age 
HR, SBP 
Serum Cr 
Cardiac arrest 
ECG  
Cardiac biomarker 
Killip class
Risk thresholds:
 Low risk HEART score <3
Neg 0, 3-h cTn
Neg 0, 2-h hs-cTnEDACS 
score <16
Neg 0, 2 h 
hs-cTn
No ischemic 
ECG ΔTIMI score 
0 (or <1 for 
mADAPT)
 Neg 0, 2-h 
cTn or  
hs-cTn
 No ischemic 
ECG ΔAge <50 y
<3 risk factors
Previous AMI 
or CAD
Neg cTn or hs-
cTn (0, 2 h) Initial hs-cTn is “very low” 
and Sx onset >3 h ago
Or
 Initial hs-cTn “low”  
and 1– or 2-h hs-cTn Δ 
is “low”Chest pain free, 
GRACE <140
 Sx <6 h - hs-cTn
<ULN (0, 3 h)
 Sx >6 h - hs-cTn
<ULN (arrival)
 Intermediate risk HEART score 4-6 NA TIMI score 2-4 NA Initial hs-cTn is between 
“low” and “high”
And/Or
1- or 2-h hs-cTn Δ is 
between low and  
high thresholds T0 hs-cTn = 12–52 
ng/L or
 1-h Δ = 3–5 ng/L
 High risk HEART score 7-1048,49NA TIMI score 5-749NA Initial hs-cTn is “high”
Or
1- or 2-h hs-cTn Δ  
is high T0 hs-cTn >52 ng/L 
Or
 Δ 1 h >5 ng/L
Performance ↑ ED discharges by 21% 
(40% versus 18%)
↓ 30-d objective testing by 
12% (69% versus 57%)
↓ length of stay by 12 h 
(9.9 versus 21.9 h)More patients 
identified as 
low risk ver-
sus ADAPT 
(42% versus 
31%)ADAPT: More 
discharged ≤6 
h (19% versus 
11%)30-d MACE 
sensitivity 
=100%
28% eligible 
for ED dis-
chargeAMI sensitivity >99%
62% Ruled out (0.2% 
30-d MACE)
25% Observe
13% Rule inAMI sensitivity 
>99%
30-d MACE not 
studied
AMI sensitivity, % 100 100 100 100 >99 96.7
cTn accuracy: 30-d 
MACE sensitivity, %100 100 100 100 NA NA 
hs-cTn accuracy: 30-d 
MACE sensitivity, %95 92 93 99 99 -- 
ED discharge, % 40 49 19 (ADAPT)
39 (mADAPT)28 -- -- 
ACS indicates acute coronary syndrome; ADAPT, Accelerated Diagnostic protocol to Assess chest Pain using Troponins; AMI, acute myocardial infarction; CP, 
chest pain or equivalent; Cr, creatinine; cTn, cardiac troponin; hs-cTn, high-sensitivity cardiac troponin; ECG, electrocardiogram; ED, emergency department; EDACS, 
emergency department ACS; ESC, European Society of Cardiology; GRACE, Global Registry of Acute Coronary Events; HEART, history, ECG, age, risk factors, 
troponin; HR, heart rate; hs, high sensitivity; MACE, major adverse cardiovascular events; mADAPT, modified (including TIMI scores of 1) ADAPT; NA, not applicable; 
neg, negative; NICE, National Institute for Health and Clinical Excellence; NOTR, No Objective Testing Rule; SBP, systolic blood pressure; SSACS, symptoms sug-
gestive of ACS; Sx, symptoms; and ULN, upper limit of normal.
*The terms “very low, ” “low, ” “high, ” “1 h Δ, ” and “2 h Δ” refer to hs-cTn assay–specific thresholds published in the ESC guideline.46,47
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on November 12, 2025

November 30, 2021 Circulation. 2021;144:e368–e454. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000001029 e392
Gulati et al 2021 Chest Pain GuidelineCLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINESall generally involve single or serial cTn measurement. 
Because there are several different manufacturers, the 
CDP should be based on assay-specific performance 
thresholds.4,5 CDPs are more likely to be successful 
when they incorporate multidisciplinary teams.
2. There are important differences in the performance 
of highly sensitive and conventional cTn assays. hs-
cTn assays may be used to guide disposition by 
repeat sampling at 1, 2, or 3 hours from ED arrival 
using the pattern of rise or fall (ie, delta) and the 
repeat value itself, based on assay-specific diag-
nostic thresholds.37-43 When using conventional cTn 
assays, the sampling timeframe is extended to 3 to 
6 hours from ED arrival.36
3. CDPs that include risk scores all perform well overall, 
with 99% to 100% sensitivity for index-visit AMI and 
30-day MACE and have been shown to decrease 
advanced testing to varying degrees and should be used particularly with conventional cTn.2,13,30-35 
However, because sex-specific considerations are 
not included in all scoring systems, their effective-
ness in men and women may not be equal.51
4. Previous test results should always be consid-
ered in the evaluation of patients with acute chest 
pain once ACS has been ruled out. In those with 
recent cardiac testing and normal findings who do 
not have biomarker evidence of acute myocardial 
injury, further testing is of limited value, provided that 
adequate exercise levels were achieved or pharma-
cologic stress was performed, imaging was of suf-
ficient quality, and there are no changes in symptom 
frequency or stability at the new visit. The “warranty” 
intervals (Table 7) for the various cardiac testing 
modalities differ because of the low number of inci-
dent events among patients with a normal CCTA, 
although patients with normal stress testing may still 
have significant plaque and a higher event rate.20-22 
The warranty period for a normal stress-rest SPECT 
is highly variable because it is primarily determined 
by the type of stress, the patient’s clinical character-
istics, and left ventricular ejection fraction.52
5. To use cTn properly, an understanding of the assay 
used (high sensitivity or conventional) and the tim-
ing of chest pain onset relative to ED arrival is criti-
cal.17 ,38,39 CDPs that emphasize rapid rule-out based 
on single hs-cTn concentrations below the limit 
of detection should be limited to patients whose 
symptoms started at least 3 hours before ED arri
val.2,5,6,11,14,16,25,40-43,53-55 Unlike high-sensitivity assays, 
clinical decision-making based on single measure-
ment of conventional cTn has not been validated.36 
If the clinical presentation is still suspicious for ACS 
or diagnostic uncertainty remains after serial cTn 
measurement, it may be reasonable to repeat cTn 
assay later (ie, beyond 3 hours for high-sensitivity 
and beyond 6 hours for conventional assays).23,40,41
4.1.1. Low-Risk Patients With Acute Chest Pain
Recommendations for Low-Risk Patients With Acute Chest Pain
Referenced studies that support the recommendations are 
summarized in Online Data Supplements 10 and 11.
COR LOE Recommendations
1 B-NR1. Patients with acute chest pain and a 30-day 
risk of death or MACE <1% should be 
designated as low risk.1-11
2a B-R2. In patients with acute chest pain and suspected 
ACS who are deemed low-risk (<1% 30-day 
risk of death or MACE), it is reasonable to 
discharge home without admission or urgent 
cardiac testing.12-16
Synopsis
Low-risk patients are those with symptoms suggestive of 
ACS and whose probability of MACE within 30 days is Table 7. Warranty Period for Prior Cardiac Testing
Test Modality ResultWarranty 
Period
Anatomic Normal coronary angiogram 
CCTA with no stenosis or plaque2 y
Stress testing Normal stress test (given adequate stress) 1 y
Table 8 provides a definition used for low-risk chest pain patients. CCTA 
indicates coronary computed tomographic angiography.
Table 8. Definition Used for Low-Risk Patients With Chest Pain
 Low Risk (<1% 30-d Risk for Death or 
MACE)
hs-cTn Based
 T-0 T-0 hs-cTn below the assay limit of detection 
or “very low” threshold if symptoms present for 
at least 3 h
 T-0 and 1- or 2-h Delta T-0 hs-cTn and 1- or 2-h delta are both below 
the assay “low” thresholds (>99% NPV for 
30-d MACE)
Clinical Decision Pathway Based
 HEART Pathway20HEART score ≤3, initial and serial cTn/hs-cTn  
< assay 99th percentile
 EDACS14EDACS score ≤16; initial and serial cTn/hs-cTn 
< assay 99th percentile
 ADAPT21TIMI score 0, initial and serial cTn/hs-cTn  
< assay 99th percentile
 mADAPT TIMI score 0/1, initial and serial cTn/hs-cTn  
< assay 99th percentile
 NOTR150 factors
ADAPT indicates 2-hour Accelerated Diagnostic Protocol to Access Patients 
with Chest Pain Symptoms Using Contemporary Troponins as the Only Bio-
markers; cTn, cardiac troponin; EDACS, Emergency Department Acute Coro-
nary Syndrome; HEART Pathway, History, ECG, Age, Risk Factors, Troponin; 
hs-cTn, high-sensitivity cardiac troponin; MACE, major adverse cardiovascular 
events; mADAPT, modified 2-hour Accelerated Diagnostic Protocol to Access 
Patients with Chest Pain Symptoms Using Contemporary Troponins as the Only 
Biomarkers; NOTR, No Objective Testing Rule; NPV, negative predictive value; 
and TIMI, Thrombolysis in Myocardial Infarction.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on November 12, 2025

Circulation. 2021;144:e368–e454. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000001029 November 30, 2021 e393
Gulati et al 2021 Chest Pain GuidelineCLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINES≤1%.17 This estimate is based on clinical information that 
is readily available during the course of evaluation, typically 
occurring in the ED. There are several methods to deter-
mine that a patient is low risk (Table 8) but, invariably, all in-
volve taking an appropriate history and physical examina-
tion, demonstration that the ECG is normal, nonischemic, 
or unchanged from the previous ECG, and cTn measure-
ment at a single point in time (if presentation is >3 hours 
from symptom onset and using a high-sensitivity assay) 
or serially1-11 (with incorporation of a chest pain risk score 
into the CDP if using a conventional cTn assay). Impor-
tantly, there is no evidence to support routine admission 
or cardiac testing for chest pain patients who are low risk, 
although outpatient CAC scanning can provide additional 
information for longer-term risk stratification.
Recommendation-Specific Supportive Text
1. A large proportion of patients presenting to the ED 
with chest pain are low risk based on a combination 
of features, including clinical stability, medical history, 
nonischemic ECG, and absence of acute myocardial 
injury on cTn measurement. Such individuals have 
a <1% frequency of ACS or MACE at 30 days.1-11 
Although achieving this with conventional cTn assays 
requires incorporation of risk scores into a CPD, hs-
cTn results can be used on their own. This approach 
has been validated based on 15 studies including a 
total of >9 600 patients, with a demonstrated nega-
tive predictive value for MI or death at 30 days of 
99.8%.11 These findings reflect studies involving 
both hs-cTnI and hs-cTnT using serial measurement 
algorithms or a single hs-cTn, provided the final mea-
surement is performed ≥ 3 hours after the onset of 
symptoms, without incorporation of risk scores.
2. For this low-risk subset of ED patients who have 
chest pain, there is no evidence that stress testing 
or cardiac imaging within 30 days of the index ED 
visit improves their outcomes.18 This represents a 
change from previous guidelines where stress 
testing within 72 hours was broadly recommended 
for patients with acute chest pain.19 However, many 
of these patients have baseline cardiac risk fac-
tors that need to be managed. Pathways to facili-
tate outpatient follow-up for further evaluation 
and guideline-directed management of cardiac 
risk factors should be considered. Among patients 
presenting to the ED with chest pain, there is a 
separate group that is at such low risk of having 
atherosclerotic plaque or 30-day MACE that they 
do not even need CDP-based risk stratification.
4.1.1.1. Cost-Value Considerations in the Evaluation 
of Low-Risk Patients
The costs associated with the acute evaluation of chest 
pain have been examined within systematic reviews, health technology appraisals, and data collected in the obser-
vational or randomized clinical trial setting.1-10 The deci-
sion analytic models suggest that the use of hs-Tn can 
be cost effective as a rule-out for ACS, primarily attribut-
able to prompt discharge of patients without hs-Tn eleva-
tions.2,8,11,12 Moreover, hs-Tn–guided diagnostic strategies 
also reduced the use of stress testing by nearly one-third.13 
From a large multicenter registry, the reduced time to dis-
charge and use of noninvasive testing contributed to a cost 
savings of 20%.13 Nonadherence to management recom-
mendations impact the potential for cost savings.5 From a 
randomized trial applying the HEART Pathway, a modest 
30-day cost savings of $216 per patient (P=0.04) was 
observed.6 However, the overall reductions in hospital ad-
mission and length of stay impacted population estimates 
for cost savings from 1 ED registry of 30 769 patients 
presenting before and 23 699 patients presenting after 
implementation of an accelerated diagnostic pathway and 
resulted in a total cost reduction of $13.5 million (Austra-
lian).7 Thus, improved process efficiency and discharge of 
low-risk patients largely results in overall cost reductions.
4.1.2. Intermediate-Risk Patients With Acute 
Chest Pain
Recommendations for Intermediate-Risk Patients With Acute Chest 
Pain
Referenced studies that support the recommendations are 
summarized in Online Data Supplements 12 and 13.
COR LOE Recommendations
1 C-EO1. For intermediate-risk patients with acute chest 
pain, TTE is recommended as a rapid, bedside 
test to establish baseline ventricular and valvular 
function, evaluate for wall motion abnormalities, 
and to assess for pericardial effusion.
2a A2. For intermediate-risk patients with acute chest 
pain, management in an observation unit is 
reasonable to shorten length of stay and lower 
cost relative to an inpatient admission.1-7
Synopsis
Patients in the ED without high-risk features and not clas-
sified as low risk by a CDP fall into an intermediate-risk 
group. Intermediate-risk patients do not have evidence of 
acute myocardial injury by troponin but remain candidates 
for additional cardiac testing. Some may have chronic or 
minor troponin elevations. This testing often requires more 
time than is appropriate for an ED visit. These patients 
may be placed in an inpatient bed or managed in a dedi-
cated observation unit using a chest pain protocol.
Recommendation-Specific Supportive Text
1. Prompt use of TTE allows for an evaluation of car-
diac cause for symptoms and evaluation of alter-
native pathologies for acute chest pain.8-13 Rapid 
echocardiographic assessment may facilitate 
imaging of patients while they are symptomatic. 
Point-of-care echocardiograms performed at the 
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on November 12, 2025

November 30, 2021 Circulation. 2021;144:e368–e454. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000001029 e394
Gulati et al 2021 Chest Pain GuidelineCLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINESbedside by properly trained clinicians and techni-
cians may be particularly useful.
2. The additional testing needed for intermediate-risk 
patients often requires more time than is appropri-
ate for an ED visit and is often performed under 
“observation” outpatient status. These patients may 
be placed in an inpatient bed or managed in a dedi-
cated observation unit. Relative to care in an inpa-
tient bed, dedicated observation units have been 
shown to decrease hospital admissions, length of 
stay, and cost while improving inpatient bed avail-
ability and chest pain patient satisfaction.1-7
4.1.2.1. Intermediate-Risk Patients With Acute Chest 
Pain and No Known CAD
Recommendations for Intermediate-Risk Patients With No Known CAD
Referenced studies that support the recommendations are 
summarized in Online Data Supplements 14 and 15.
COR LOE Recommendations
Index Diagnostic Testing
Anatomic Testing
1 A1. For intermediate-risk patients with acute  
chest pain and no known CAD eligible 
for diagnostic testing after a negative or 
inconclusive evaluation for ACS, CCTA is  
useful for exclusion of atherosclerotic plaque 
and obstructive CAD.1-11
1 C-EO2. For intermediate-risk patients with acute chest 
pain, moderate-severe ischemia on current or 
prior (≤1 year) stress testing, and no known 
CAD established by prior anatomic testing,  
ICA is recommended.
2a C-LD3. For intermediate-risk patients with acute chest 
pain with evidence of previous mildly abnormal 
stress test results (≤ 1 year), CCTA is reasonable 
for diagnosing obstructive CAD.12,13
Stress Testing
1 B-NR4. For intermediate-risk patients with acute chest 
pain and no known CAD who are eligible for 
cardiac testing, either exercise ECG, stress 
echocardiography, stress PET/SPECT MPI, 
or stress CMR is useful for the diagnosis of 
myocardial ischemia.1,4,10,14-36
Sequential or Add-on Diagnostic Testing
2a B-NR5. For intermediate-risk patients with acute 
chest pain and no known CAD, with a 
coronary artery stenosis of 40% to 90% in a 
proximal or middle coronary artery on CCTA, 
FFR-CT can be useful for the diagnosis 
of vessel-specific ischemia and to guide 
decision-making regarding the use of coronary 
revascularization.37-43
2a C-EO6. For intermediate-risk patients with acute 
chest pain and no known CAD, as well as 
an inconclusive prior stress test, CCTA can 
be useful for excluding the presence of 
atherosclerotic plaque and obstructive CAD.
2a C-EO7 . For intermediate-risk patients with acute chest 
pain and no known CAD, with an inconclusive 
CCTA, stress imaging (with echocardiography, 
PET/SPECT MPI, or CMR) can be useful for 
the diagnosis of myocardial ischemia.Synopsis
For patients with recent prior testing and normal find-
ings, no further testing is indicated, given adequate 
exercise levels were achieved or pharmacologic stress 
was performed and if imaging was of sufficient quality, 
provided there are no changes in symptom frequency or 
stability at the new visit. The intervals (1 year for stress 
testing, 2 years for CCTA without plaque or stenosis) 
differ because of a lack of CAD progression and the low 
number of incident events among patients with a normal 
CCTA, although patients with normal stress testing may 
still have significant plaque and a higher event rate.44-46 
With a previously inconclusive or mildly abnormal stress 
test in the past year, CCTA is recommended, avoiding 
the potential for inconclusive results if the same type 
of test is repeated and enabling a more definitive rule-
out of obstructive CAD. Among patients who present 
with acute chest pain who have had moderate-severe 
abnormalities on previous testing, but no interval ana-
tomic testing, direct referral to ICA may be helpful for 
diagnosis of obstructive CAD.
Among those without a previous diagnostic evalu-
ation and no known CAD, CCTA or stress testing may 
be the initial method of testing. Second-line testing 
may be helpful for patients with an initial inconclusive 
stress test. Similarly, for intermediate-risk patients with 
an intermediate stenosis on CCTA, FFR-CT, or stress 
testing may also be indicated.
ICA is indicated for patients categorized as high risk 
on a validated risk score (Figure 9). However, patients 
with an intermediate-risk score may also be candidates 
for CCTA or ICA if moderate-severe ischemia or sig-
nificant left ventricular dysfunction is detected on index 
diagnostic testing.
Although there are several acceptable testing modali-
ties for intermediate-risk patients with acute chest pain, 
the decision to use one versus another should be guided 
by local expertise and availability.
Recommendation-Specific Supportive Text
Anatomic Testing
1. In the ED evaluation of patients with acute chest 
pain, CCTA contributes to a reduced time to diag-
nosis and prompt discharge, without impacting 
safety (ie, no difference in death, repeat ED visits, 
or ACS over 1 to 6 months of follow-up) compared 
with a standard evaluation including stress test-
ing.1-4,8,47-50 Long-term prognostic data are limited, 
but the CATCH (Cardiac CT in the Treatment of 
Acute Chest Pain) trial showed a relative hazard 
for CAD events at ∼18 months of 0.62 (95% CI: 
0.40–0.98; P=0.04) for CCTA versus a standard 
care strategy.48 Similar 40-month MACE rates were 
reported in the PROSPECT (Providing Regional 
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on November 12, 2025

Circulation. 2021;144:e368–e454. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000001029 November 30, 2021 e395
Gulati et al 2021 Chest Pain GuidelineCLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINESObservations to Study Predictors of Events in 
the Coronary Tree) trial comparing CCTA- versus 
MPI-directed strategies (P=0.29).10 Similar 2-year 
outcomes were also reported for stress echocar-
diography and CCTA (P=0.47).29
2. In patients who have evidence of moderate or 
severe ischemia on previous stress testing, who 
were not revascularized, and who present with 
acute chest pain, additional noninvasive stress 
testing is unlikely to result in any change in man-
agement. Such patients are assumed to have sig-
nificant flow-limiting CAD and can proceed directly 
to an invasive evaluation if coronary revasculariza-
tion is consistent with the goals of care. A size-
able proportion of patients with moderate-severe 
ischemia do not undergo ICA51,52 and may require 
additional assessment, if repeat symptoms occur.
3. Symptomatic patients with inconclusive or mildly 
abnormal stress tests often have an increased risk 
of MACE.53 Patients with previous stress testing 
often have atherosclerotic plaque and are at risk 
for obstructive CAD lesions.12,13
Stress Testing
4. Among patients evaluated in the ED who need 
further testing, exercise ECG is safe with most 
patients having negative studies and a low risk of 
ACS.1,4,10,14-31,54 Stress echocardiography is safe 
and effective for triage and prompt discharge of 
patients and is associated with few events among 
those with normal or low-risk findings over near-
term follow-up of up to 6 months.17 ,18,36 Prompt 
stress echocardiography resulted in a reduction 
in ED and hospital length of stay, compared with 
CCTA, with similar 2-year MACE rates (P=0.47).29 
In the ED evaluation of patients with acute chest 
pain, a nuclear MPI strategy is similarly safe when 
compared with CCTA with no difference in MACE 
(death, ACS, or stroke) over follow-up of 6 to 12 
months. Longer-term follow-up data from the 
PROSPECT trial10 supported that at ∼3.5 years, the 
rate of MACE was similar between MPI and CCTA 
(P=0.29).10 Compared with CCTA, use of stress 
MPI delayed the time to diagnosis by >50%.1,4 
Furthermore, recent observation from 213 patients 
referred for rest-stress MPI with mildly abnormal 
hs-cTn values reported no adverse events related 
to the tests and a modest 13.6% yield for isch-
emic studies.55 Single-center, small (n=105) ran-
domized trial evidence suggests that stress CMR 
is safe without a near-term (90-day) increase in 
hospital readmission or additional testing.32-34 From 
a single-center registry (n=135), stress CMR was 
associated with a high sensitivity (100%) and 
specificity (93%) for the detection of obstructive 
CAD or cardiovascular events at 1 year.35Sequential or Add-on Testing
5. Patients with coronary artery stenosis of 40% 
to 90% in a proximal or middle coronary seg-
ment on CCTA may benefit from measurement of 
FFR-CT.37-43 In a large registry of 555 patients, the 
addition of FFR-CT was safe with no difference in 
90-day MACE compared with CCTA alone.42 No 
deaths or MI occurred among patients with a nega-
tive FFR-CT when revascularization was deferred.
6. CCTA is highly effective at ruling out the presence 
of plaque or stenosis and may help to clarify risk 
assessment and subsequent management deci-
sions in patients with no known CAD who have 
inconclusive stress test results.
7 . Patients with acute chest pain who have indetermi-
nate stenosis on CCTA may benefit from having a 
stress test with imaging to evaluate for myocardial 
ischemia.37-43
4.1.2.1.1. Cost-Value Considerations
Economic evaluations have explored the value of stress 
echocardiography, CCTA, and stress nuclear imaging. 
Several observational series report that prompt stress 
echocardiography in the ED for the evaluation of acute 
chest pain is associated with significantly lower costs, 
with no adverse sequelae after early discharge.1,2 In a 
single-center randomized trial of 400 patients, prompt 
stress echocardiography was associated with a re-
duced rate of hospitalization (P=0.026) and length 
of stay in the ED (P <0.0001).3 The CT-STAT (Sys-
tematic Triage of Acute Chest Pain Patients to Treat-
ment) trial reported on the use of CCTA (n=361 pa-
tients) compared with stress MPI (n=338 patients) in 
the acute evaluation of chest pain in the ED.4 In the 
CT-STAT trial, the time to diagnosis was 2.9 hours in 
the CCTA arm and 6.2 hours in the stress MPI arm 
(P<0.0001). Accordingly, median adjusted ED charg-
es were nearly 40% lower for CCTA, compared with 
stress MPI ($2137 for CCTA versus $3458 for stress 
MPI; P<0.001). Overall, CCTA resulted in improved ef-
ficiency with a reduction in length of stay and prompt 
discharge,5,6 resulting in cost savings from 15% to 
38% when compared with standard care strategies4,7 
and a weighted cost savings of $680.8
4.1.2.2. Intermediate-Risk Patients With Acute Chest 
Pain and Known CAD
Recommendations for Intermediate-Risk Patients With Acute Chest 
Pain and Known CAD
Referenced studies that support the recommendations are 
summarized in Online Data Supplements 16 and 17 .
COR LOE Recommendations
1 A1. For intermediate-risk patients with acute chest 
pain who have known CAD and present with 
new onset or worsening symptoms, GDMT 
should be optimized before additional cardiac 
testing is performed.1,2
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on November 12, 2025

November 30, 2021 Circulation. 2021;144:e368–e454. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000001029 e396
Gulati et al 2021 Chest Pain GuidelineCLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINES1 A2. For intermediate-risk patients with acute chest 
pain who have worsening frequency of symptoms 
with significant left main, proximal left anterior 
descending stenosis, or multivessel CAD on 
prior anatomic testing or history of prior coronary 
revascularization, ICA is recommended.3-8
2a B-NR3. For intermediate-risk patients with acute chest 
pain and known nonobstructive CAD, CCTA 
can be useful to determine progression of 
atherosclerotic plaque and obstructive CAD.9-11
2a B-NR4. For intermediate-risk patients with acute chest 
pain and coronary artery stenosis of 40% 
to 90% in a proximal or middle segment on 
CCTA, FFR-CT is reasonable for diagnosis 
of vessel-specific ischemia and to guide 
decision-making regarding the use of coronary 
revascularization.12-17
2a B-NR5. For intermediate-risk patients with acute chest 
pain and known CAD who have new onset or 
worsening symptoms, stress imaging (PET/
SPECT MPI, CMR, or stress echocardiography) 
is reasonable.18-21Synopsis
Figure 10 includes the evaluation algorithm for patients 
with known CAD, including patients with nonobstructive 
and obstructive CAD. In patents with known nonobstructive 
CAD (ie, a luminal stenosis 1% to 49% on CCTA or ICA or 
calcified plaque on chest CT), repeat CCTA is recommend-
ed unless there is a large enough plaque burden where 
ischemia is suspected. The use of FFR-CT may be helpful 
to guide clinical decision-making regarding the use of coro-
nary revascularization.16 For all other patients with known 
CAD, stress testing is recommended to guide decisions on 
optimizing medical management and revascularization.
Recommendation-Specific Supportive Text
1. As shown in many secondary prevention trials, 
such as the Veterans Affairs Non-Q-Wave myo-
cardial infarction (VANQUISH), COURAGE and 
ISCHEMIA, GDMT should be assessed in all 
patients with known CAD and optimized when 
symptomatic.2,22,23Recommendations for Intermediate-Risk Patients With Acute Chest 
Pain and Known CAD (Continued)
COR LOE Recommendations
Figure 9. Evaluation Algorithm for Patients With Suspected ACS at Intermediate Risk With No Known CAD
Test choice should be guided by local availability and expertise. 
*Recent negative test: normal CCTA ≤2 years (no plaque/no stenosis) OR negative stress test ≤1 year, given adequate stress. 
†High-risk CAD means left main stenosis ≥ 50%; anatomically significant 3-vessel disease (≥70% stenosis). 
‡For FFR-CT, turnaround times may impact prompt clinical care decisions. However, the use of FFR-CT does not require additional testing, as 
would be the case when adding stress testing. 
CAD indicates coronary artery disease; CCTA, coronary CT angiography; CMR, cardiovascular magnetic resonance imaging; CT, computed 
tomography; FFR-CT, fractional flow reserve with CT; GDMT, guideline-directed medical therapy; ICA, invasive coronary angiography; INOCA, 
ischemia and no obstructive coronary artery disease; PET, positron emission tomography; and SPECT, single-photon emission CT.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on November 12, 2025

Circulation. 2021;144:e368–e454. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000001029 November 30, 2021 e397
Gulati et al 2021 Chest Pain GuidelineCLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINES2. ICA is an effective means for diagnosing obstruc-
tive CAD and guiding the use of coronary revas-
cularization. For the intermediate-risk patients with 
a previous history of CAD, ICA is reasonable for 
patients presenting with frequent weekly or daily 
symptoms or for those already on GDMT as well as 
those with high-risk CAD (left main or proximal left 
anterior descending or multivessel CAD).3. For patients with previous anatomic testing that 
revealed nonobstructive CAD, CCTA has been shown 
to effectively document progressive CAD, including 
more extensive atherosclerotic plaque or the pres-
ence of high-risk plaque features or new obstructive 
stenosis ≥50%.9-11,24 Patients in this category also 
include those patients with a previous CAC scan (or 
those for whom coronary artery calcification was 
Figure 10. Evaluation Algorithm for Patients With Suspected ACS at Intermediate Risk With Known CAD
Test choice should be guided by local availability and expertise. 
*Known CAD is prior MI, revascularization, known obstructive or nonobstructive CAD on invasive or CCTA. 
†If extensive plaque is present a high-quality CCTA is unlikely to be achieved, and stress testing is preferred 
‡Obstructive CAD includes prior coronary artery bypass graft/percutaneous coronary intervention. 
§High-risk CAD means left main stenosis ≥50%; anatomically significant 3-vessel disease (≥70% stenosis). 
‖FFR-CT turnaround times may impact prompt clinical care decisions. 
ACS indicates acute coronary syndrome; CAD, coronary artery disease; CCTA, coronary CT angiography; CMR, cardiovascular magnetic resonance; 
CT, computed tomography; FFR-CT, fractional flow reserve with CT; GDMT, guideline-directed medical therapy; ICA, invasive coronary angiography; 
INOCA, ischemia and no obstructive coronary artery disease; PET, positron emission tomography; and SPECT, single-photon emission CT.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on November 12, 2025

November 30, 2021 Circulation. 2021;144:e368–e454. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000001029 e398
Gulati et al 2021 Chest Pain GuidelineCLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINESnoted as an incidental finding on chest CT) who 
present to an ED for evaluation of chest pain where 
concern exists with regard to the extent of noncal-
cified plaque and potential for underlying obstruc-
tive stenosis. However, for patients with extensive 
plaque, a stress test is preferred.
4. Patients with acute chest pain who have coronary 
artery stenosis from 40% to 90% on CCTA may ben-
efit from measurement of FFR-CT, especially when 
the stenosis is proximal or mid-coronary artery.12-17 ,25 
From 1 large clinical registry, the deferral of coro-
nary revascularization with a normal FFR-CT was 
safe, with no difference in MACE at 90 days.16
5. Most randomized trials that examined the role of 
stress testing in the ED enrolled patients with no 
known CAD, with few including patients with obstruc-
tive CAD (range: 7%–15%).18-20 Despite this, assess-
ing the functional significance of obstructive CAD is 
an important part of ischemia-guided management.26
4.1.3. High-Risk Patients With Acute Chest Pain
Recommendations for High-Risk Patients With Acute Chest Pain
Referenced studies that support the recommendations are 
summarized in Online Data Supplements 18 and 19.
COR LOE Recommendations
Recommendations for High-Risk Patients, Including Those With 
High-Risk Findings on CCTA or Stress Testing
1 B-NR1. For patients with acute chest pain and 
suspected ACS who have new ischemic 
changes on electrocardiography, troponin-
confirmed acute myocardial injury, new-
onset left ventricular systolic dysfunction 
(ejection fraction <40%), newly diagnosed 
moderate-severe ischemia on stress testing, 
hemodynamic instability, and/or a high clinical 
decision pathway (CDP) risk score should be 
designated as high risk for short-term MACE.1-3
1 C-EO2. For patients with acute chest pain and 
suspected ACS who are designated as high 
risk, ICA is recommended.4-7
2a B-NR3. For high-risk patients with acute chest pain 
who are troponin positive in whom obstructive 
CAD has been excluded by CCTA or ICA, 
CMR or echocardiography can be effective in 
establishing alternative diagnoses.8-12
Synopsis
Patients with symptoms suggestive of ACS who are at 
high risk of short-term MACE include those with new 
ischemic changes on the ECG, troponin-confirmed acute 
myocardial injury, new-onset left ventricular systolic 
dysfunction (ejection fraction <40%), newly diagnosed 
moderate-severe ischemia on stress imaging, and/or a 
high risk score on CDP.4,13,14 ICA is indicated for patients 
with confirmed ACS based on a robust body of random-
ized trial evidence and clinical practice guideline indica-
tions.4-7 In the patients with a negative initial evaluation, 
ICA is also indicated for those categorized as high risk on 
a validated risk stratification instrument.For high-risk patients with a documented AMI on the 
index ED evaluation and who demonstrate on CCTA or 
ICA normal or nonobstructive CAD, CMR and echocar-
diography are useful for examining alternative causes 
for symptoms such as nonischemic cardiomyopathy or 
myocarditis.8-11
Recommendation-Specific Supportive Text
1. Patients with acute chest pain and suspected ACS 
are considered at high risk for short-term MACE 
if they have new ischemic changes on electrocar-
diography, troponin-confirmed acute myocardial 
injury, new-onset left ventricular systolic dysfunc-
tion (ejection fraction <40%), newly diagnosed 
moderate-severe ischemia on stress testing, 
hemodynamic instability, and/or a high CDP risk 
score. Risk scores are recommended in guidelines 
to facilitate the management of patients who pres-
ent with ACS.3,15,16
2. Among patients categorized as high risk, ICA 
provides a comprehensive assessment of the 
extent and severity of obstructive CAD. Moreover, 
the determination of the severity of anatomic 
CAD is critical to guide the use of coronary 
revascularization.6
3. Approximately 6% to 15% of troponin-posi-
tive ACS occurs in the absence of obstructive 
CAD.17 ,18 Additional testing may be helpful to 
identify the cause that may alter an ensuing 
therapeutic strategy.19 Evidence supports that 
CMR can identify wall motion abnormalities and 
myocardial edema and distinguish infarct-related 
scar from non-CAD causes such as myocardi-
tis and nonischemic cardiomyopathy. When per-
formed within 2 weeks of ACS, CMR can be 
useful to identify MI with nonobstructive CAD 
(MINOCA) from other causes.8-11
4.1.4. Acute Chest Pain in Patients With Prior 
Coronary Artery Bypass Graft (CABG) Surgery
Recommendations for Acute Chest Pain in Patients With Prior CABG 
Surgery
COR LOE Recommendations
1 C-LD1. In patients with prior CABG surgery presenting with 
acute chest pain who do not have ACS, performing 
stress imaging is effective to evaluate for myocardial 
ischemia or CCTA for graft stenosis or occlusion.1-7
1 C-LD2. In patients with prior CABG surgery presenting with 
acute chest pain, who do not have ACS8-14 or who have 
an indeterminate/nondiagnostic stress test, ICA is 
useful.8
Synopsis
There are many potential causes of acute chest pain 
in the months after CABG. Musculoskeletal pain from 
sternotomy remains the most common. However, other 
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on November 12, 2025

Circulation. 2021;144:e368–e454. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000001029 November 30, 2021 e399
Gulati et al 2021 Chest Pain GuidelineCLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINEScauses such as myocardial ischemia from acute graft 
stenosis or occlusion,1,2 pericarditis, PE, sternal wound 
infection, or nonunion should also be considered. Post-
sternotomy pain syndrome is defined as discomfort af-
ter thoracic surgery, persisting for at least 2 months, and 
without apparent cause.15 The incidence of post-ster-
notomy pain syndrome has been found to be as low as 
7% and as high as 66%,16-19 with a higher prevalence in 
women compared with men within the first 3 months of 
thoracic surgery (51.4% versus 31.3%; P<0.01) but, af-
ter 3 months, postoperative sex difference in prevalence 
was not seen.20 Graft failure within the first year post-
CABG using saphenous venous grafts is usually a result 
of technical issues, intimal hyperplasia, or thrombosis.5 
Internal mammary artery graft failure within the first-year 
post-CABG is most commonly attributable to issues with 
the anastomotic site of the graft.
Reasons for acute chest pain several years after 
CABG include either graft stenosis or occlusion or pro-
gression of disease in a non-bypassed vessel. One year 
after CABG, ∼ 10% to 20% of saphenous vein grafts 
fail, while by 10 years, only about half of saphenous 
vein grafts are patent.5 In contrast, the internal mam-
mary artery has patency rates of 90% to 95% 10 
to 15 years after CABG.6 Compared with the use of 
saphenous vein grafts, the use of radial artery grafts 
for CABG also resulted in a higher rate of patency at 5 
years of follow-up.7 In addition, knowledge of the native 
coronary anatomy and type of revascularization (com-
plete or incomplete) is useful for interpretation of func-
tional testing.
Recommendation-Specific Supportive Text
1. Acute chest pain in patients with prior CABG 
may be caused by myocardial ischemia as a 
result of technical errors at the graft anastomotic 
site, thrombosis within the graft, graft intimal 
hyperplasia, or vasospasm within arterial grafts. 
Progressive atherosclerosis within bypass grafts 
or the native coronary vessels may also result 
in acute chest pain caused by myocardial isch-
emia. Noninvasive stress imaging testing is rea-
sonable in these patients as stress imaging will 
identify ischemic myocardial territories that will 
further guide revascularization for patients who 
are amenable to and are candidates for revas-
cularization. CCTA has a great degree of accu-
racy with a sensitivity and specificity of detecting 
complete graft occlusions, 99% and 99%, 
respectively, when compared with the standard 
of ICA.21 Furthermore, CCTA was ideal in assess-
ing bypass grafts because of the large size of 
these vessels, decreased vessel calcification, and 
decreased motion of these vessels when com-
pared with native coronary vessels. Evaluation of bypass grafts has been shown to be successful 
in 93% to 100% of patients.21 In patients who 
have acute chest pain without features of ACS, 
CCTA is especially useful for assessing graft 
patency and is less robust for assessing native 
coronary vessel stenosis in this population.1-7
2. There are clinical features and stress imaging 
test features in patients with prior CABG pre-
senting with acute chest pain with no ACS that 
may indicate a high likelihood of severe ischemic 
heart disease such as new resting left ventricu-
lar systolic dysfunction (left ventricular ejection 
fraction <35%) not readily explained by non-
coronary causes, stress electrocardiographic 
findings including 2 mm of ST-segment depres-
sion at low workload or persisting into recov-
ery, exercise-induced ST-segment elevation, or 
exercise-induced VT/ventricular fibrillation (VF), 
severe stress-induced left ventricular systolic 
dysfunction, stress-induced perfusion abnormali-
ties involving ≥ 10% of the myocardium, or stress-
induced left ventricular dilation. In those with prior 
CABG with high-risk stress imaging features, 
referral for ICA is useful provided that these 
patients are amenable to, and are candidates for, 
coronary revascularization.8-14 Patients with prior 
CABG presenting with acute chest pain without 
the presence of ACS may have stress imaging 
features that are equivocal or nondiagnostic for 
the presence of myocardial ischemia. Equivocal or 
nondiagnostic stress imaging may be as a result 
of patient’s body habitus, inadequate or subopti-
mal heart rate, arrhythmias such as atrial fibrilla-
tion, left bundle branch block, or patient motion. In 
these patients, performing an ICA is reasonable 
when the angiographic findings have a high likeli-
hood of impacting therapeutic decisions.8
4.1.5. Evaluation of Patients With Acute Chest Pain 
Receiving Dialysis
Recommendation for Evaluation of Patients With Acute Chest Pain 
Receiving Dialysis
Referenced studies that support the recommendation are summarized 
in Online Data Supplement 20.
COR LOE Recommendation
1 B-NR1. In patients who experience acute unremitting chest 
pain while undergoing dialysis, transfer by EMS to 
an acute care setting is recommended.1-5
Synopsis
In 2015, there were nearly 500 000 people in the United 
States who received maintenance dialysis to treat end-
stage renal disease.1 Chest pain occurs during hemodial-
ysis in 2% to 5% of patients.6,7 Causes are numerous and 
related to the high prevalence of severe cardiovascular 
disease in this population and the dialysis procedure 
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on November 12, 2025

November 30, 2021 Circulation. 2021;144:e368–e454. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000001029 e400
Gulati et al 2021 Chest Pain GuidelineCLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINESitself. Causes include AMI or ACS, pericarditis, PE, pleuri-
tis, hemolysis, gastroesophageal reflux, subclavian steal, 
and musculoskeletal disorders.7 Myocardial ischemia is 
the most frequent serious cause and can be induced 
by hypotension6,7 or tachyarrhythmias2 occurring during 
dialysis in patients with CAD. AMI in patients undergoing 
dialysis is less frequently associated with chest pain than 
in patients who are not on dialysis, but warning signs may 
include diaphoresis or dyspnea.3 Unusual but serious 
causes of chest pain during dialysis are embolism6 and 
vessel perforation by catheter.4,5 When indicated, cardiac 
testing for patients on dialysis should be the same as 
those who are not on dialysis.
Recommendation-Specific Supportive Text
1. Because the risk of CAD is relatively high in 
patients undergoing dialysis, when acute unremit-
ting chest pain occurs during dialysis, a 12-lead 
ECG should be performed and the patient should 
be urgently transferred by EMS to an acute care 
setting for evaluation for cause of symptoms and 
further clinical engagement.3
4.1.6. Evaluation of Acute Chest Pain in Patients 
With Cocaine and Methamphetamine Use
Recommendation for Evaluation of Acute Chest Pain in Patients With 
Cocaine and Methamphetamine Use
Referenced studies that support the recommendation are summarized 
in Online Data Supplement 21.
COR LOE Recommendation
2a B-NR1. In patients presenting with acute chest pain, 
it is reasonable to consider cocaine and 
methamphetamine use as a cause of their 
symptoms.1-3
Synopsis
The most frequent presenting complaint of cocaine 
abuse is acute chest pain, resulting from ≥ 1 of the alka-
loid’s many cardiovascular actions.1,4,5 Cocaine produces 
a hyperadrenergic state by blocking neuronal reuptake 
of norepinephrine and dopamine. The accumulation of 
these catecholamines increases heart rate and blood 
pressure, sometimes dramatically. These actions and 
the drug’s simultaneous effect of coronary vasocon-
striction and elevated myocardial oxygen demand can 
produce myocardial ischemia and even infarction in 
the absence of obstructive CAD. Additional hazardous 
actions include increased myocardial contractility, car-
diac arrhythmias, myocardial toxicity directly or through 
augmented adrenergic stimulation, increased platelet 
aggregability, endothelial dysfunction, and hypertensive 
vascular catastrophes (aortic dissection, cerebrovascu-
lar hemorrhage).4-6
Methamphetamine has also been shown to lead to 
myocardial ischemia from mechanisms similar to cocaine. Studies have shown that methamphetamine can result in 
decreased myocardial perfusion. Like cocaine, metham-
phetamine also may reduce coronary sinus blood flow.7 It 
has been reported that up to 70% of methamphetamine 
users have an abnormal ECG, with the most common 
finding being tachycardia.8 Additional abnormalities on 
the ECG have been attributed to presence of hyperten-
sion, pulmonary artery hypertension, and cardiomyopathy, 
all of which have been associated with methamphet-
amine use.9 General principles for risk stratification of 
patients with chest pain apply to patients with cocaine or 
methamphetamine use.4
Recommendation-Specific Supportive Text
1. Cocaine and methamphetamine use can be con-
sidered in young patients presenting with chest 
pain and evidence of ACS; the frequency of ACS 
is <10% among cocaine and methamphetamine 
users in most studies, and death is rare.1-4 A per-
son’s urine typically tests positive for cocaine or 
methamphetamine within 1 to 4 hours of consum-
ing the drug and will continue to test positive for 2 
to 4 days.
4.1.7. Shared Decision-Making in Patients With 
Acute Chest Pain
Recommendations for Shared Decision-Making in Patients With Acute 
Chest Pain
Referenced studies that support the recommendations are 
summarized in Online Data Supplement 22.
COR LOE Recommendations
1 B-R1. For patients with acute chest pain and 
suspected ACS who are deemed low risk by 
a CDP, patient decision aids are beneficial to 
improve understanding and effectively facilitate 
risk communication.1,2
1 B-R2. For patients with acute chest pain and 
suspected ACS who are deemed intermediate 
risk by a CDP, shared decision-making 
between the clinician and patient regarding 
the need for admission, for observation, 
discharge, or further evaluation in an 
outpatient setting is recommended for 
improving patient understanding and reducing 
low-value testing.1,2
Synopsis
Risk communication and shared decision-making using 
a decision aid such as Chest Pain Choice have been 
shown to increase patient knowledge, engagement, and 
satisfaction and decrease the rate of observation unit 
admission and 30-day cardiac stress testing in both 
single-center and multicenter randomized trials.1-3 For 
low-risk patients, decision aids can facilitate risk com-
munication between the clinician and the patient and 
increase patients’ understanding of their risk and the 
importance of outpatient follow-up after discharge from 
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on November 12, 2025

Circulation. 2021;144:e368–e454. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000001029 November 30, 2021 e401
Gulati et al 2021 Chest Pain GuidelineCLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINESthe ED. For intermediate-risk patients, admission to an 
observation unit or discharge from the ED with further, 
timely evaluation in an outpatient setting is acceptable. 
Decision aids such as Chest Pain Choice can effectively 
facilitate shared decision-making regarding the need for 
admission, observation, or discharge for further evalua-
tion in an outpatient setting.3
Recommendation-Specific Supportive Text
1. Adult ED patients with acute chest pain who are 
deemed low risk are frequently admitted for obser-
vation and cardiac stress testing or CCTA, resulting 
in increased cost to the patient and the health care 
system.2 Shared decision-making is the process 
by which patients and clinicians share information 
and take steps to build consensus about preferred 
tests and treatments. In shared decision-making, 
both parties share information: the clinician offers 
options and describes the potential harms and 
benefits, and the patient communicates his or her 
preferences. Patients are prepared with a better 
understanding of the relevant factors influencing 
the decision and share responsibility for deciding 
how to proceed. Shared decision-making rests on 
the principles of patient centered care, including 
respect for patient autonomy (ie, that a patient’s 
informed preferences should be the basis for med-
ical action).4 Decision aids are patient-centered 
tools designed to facilitate shared decision-mak-
ing between a patient and the clinician such that 
patients’ values and preferences are incorporated 
into health care decisions.5 Shared decision-mak-
ing, however, can be performed without a deci-
sion aid; lack of a decision aid should not preclude 
attempts at shared decision-making.
2. In a single-center randomized trial of adults pre-
senting to the ED with a chief complaint of chest 
pain (n=204) who were being considered by the 
treating clinician for admission to the observation 
unit for cardiac stress testing, patients randomized 
to shared decision-making facilitated by the Chest 
Pain Choice Decision Aid2,3 had greater knowl-
edge, were more engaged in the decision-making 
process, and less frequently decided to be admit-
ted to the observation unit for stress testing (58% 
versus 77%, absolute difference 19%, 95% CI: 
6%-31%).2 There were no MACE after discharge 
in either group. The decision aid was subsequently 
tested in a population of 898 patients with greater 
socioeconomic diversity recruited from 6 EDs 
across the United States.1,6 Similar findings were 
observed. Analysis of health care use in this trial 
showed fewer cardiac imaging tests and lower 
overall 45-day health care use in patients random-
ized to the decision aid.7, 84.2. Evaluation of Acute Chest Pain With 
Nonischemic Cardiac Pathologies
Recommendation for Evaluation of Acute Chest Pain With Nonischemic 
Cardiac Pathologies
COR LOE Recommendation
1 C-EO1. In patients with acute chest pain in whom other 
potentially life-threatening nonischemic cardiac 
conditions are suspected (eg, aortic pathology, 
pericardial effusion, endocarditis), TTE is 
recommended for diagnosis.
Synopsis
Alternative nonischemic causes for acute chest pain 
should be considered if an ischemic cause is not sus-
pected based on initial evaluation. Echocardiography, 
as a portable bedside noninvasive and almost univer-
sally available tool, should be used to unmask some 
imminently dangerous but potentially treatable car-
diac conditions.
TTE is the primary tool to diagnose pericardial effusions 
with and without tamponade, aortic dissections (TTE and 
transesophageal echocardiography [TEE]), acute right ven-
tricular dysfunction in the setting of PE, as well as mechan-
ical complications of MI (ventricular septal rupture, free wall 
rupture, papillary muscle dysfunction and rupture).
Echocardiography can also identify cardiac masses, 
emboli, or clots in transit, intracardiac shunting, or 
endocarditis. Furthermore, beyond the anatomic find-
ings, echocardiography can be used to noninvasively 
assess volume status, pulmonary hypertension, valvu-
lar stenosis, and regurgitation. Many of these entities 
may present with acute chest pain as well as short-
ness of breath.
Recommendation-Specific Supportive Text
1. Prompt use of TTE allows for an evaluation of car-
diac cause for symptoms and evaluation of alter-
native pathologies for acute chest pain.1-6 Rapid 
echocardiographic assessment may facilitate 
imaging of the patient while symptomatic.
4.2.1. Acute Chest Pain With Suspected Acute Aortic 
Syndrome
Recommendations for Acute Chest Pain With Suspected Acute Aortic 
Syndrome
COR LOE Recommendations
1 C-EO1. In patients with acute chest pain where there is 
clinical concern for aortic dissection, computed 
tomography angiography (CTA) of the chest, 
abdomen, and pelvis is recommended for 
diagnosis and treatment planning.
1 C-EO2. In patients with acute chest pain where there is 
clinical concern for aortic dissection, TEE or CMR 
should be performed to make the diagnosis if CT 
is contraindicated or unavailable.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on November 12, 2025

November 30, 2021 Circulation. 2021;144:e368–e454. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000001029 e402
Gulati et al 2021 Chest Pain GuidelineCLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINESSynopsis
Acute aortic syndrome describes diseases involving dis-
ruptions in the aortic wall, including aortic dissection, 
intramural hematoma, and penetrating aortic ulcer.1 The 
annual incidence is 2 to 4 cases/100 000, with higher 
prevalence with genetic conditions that weaken the aor-
tic wall.2 Prominent risk factors include hypertension ath-
erosclerosis and connective tissue disease. Cocaine use 
may provoke dissection even without other risk factors.
Acute onset of severe chest or back pain heralds acute 
aortic dissection in 80% to 90% of patients, sometimes 
characterized as ripping or tearing.3 Progression can pro-
duce end-organ hypoperfusion, and proximal extension 
may cause tamponade, severe acute aortic regurgita-
tion, or rarely, STEMI. Intramural hematomas, which differ 
from dissection by absence of an identifiable intimal flap, 
have a lesser understood natural history but are typically 
evaluated and treated in a similar manner to dissections.
Recommendation-Specific Supportive Text
1. A high index of suspicion in appropriate patients, and 
a coordinated, multidisciplinary evaluation is needed 
to optimize outcomes. The diagnostic modality of 
choice in stable patients is CTA, which is both highly 
sensitive and specific.4-6 Chest radiographs can 
show mediastinal widening but may be normal.
2. TTE can show pericardial effusion or aortic regur-
gitation, and a dissection flap can sometimes be 
visualized; however, more complete imaging of the 
aortic arch requires TEE or CT. CMR is sensitive 
and specific, but CT is usually more expeditious.
4.2.2. Acute Chest Pain With Suspected PE
Recommendations for Acute Chest Pain With Suspected PE
Referenced studies that support the recommendations are 
summarized in Online Data Supplement 23.
COR LOE Recommendations
1 B-NR1. In stable patients with acute chest pain with 
high clinical suspicion for PE, CTA using a PE 
protocol is recommended.1-4
1 C-EO2. For patients with acute chest pain and possible 
PE, need for further testing should be guided 
by pretest probability.
Synopsis
The incidence of PE is estimated at 65 cases per 100 000, 
but some cases are asymptomatic and others undiag-
nosed.5,6 One-third of deaths are sudden, and 60% are undi-
agnosed before death.7 Risk factors for PE are the same 
for venous thromboembolism and include inherited hyper-
coagulable states and acquired risk factors (recent sur-
gery, trauma, immobilization, malignancy, smoking, obesity, 
oral contraception). Recognition of PE can be challenging 
because symptoms and clinical signs may be nonspecific. 
Dyspnea followed by chest pain, classically pleuritic, is the most common presenting symptom.1 Signs of deep venous 
thrombosis may be present on examination.5
Recommendation-Specific Supportive Text
1. CTA using PE protocol is the diagnostic modality 
of choice in stable patients; ventilation-perfusion 
scanning is a second-line alternative in the acute 
setting.3,4 Use of clinical prediction rules to select 
patients for imaging can decrease radiation expo-
sure and cost.8 Troponin (and brain natriuretic pep-
tide) can be elevated, and echocardiography may 
reveal acute right ventricular strain consequent to 
large PEs; troponin and brain natriuretic peptide 
are both markers for higher mortality rate.2
2. Recognition of PE is important because prompt anti-
coagulation improves outcomes.2 Clinical assess-
ment combined with pretest risk stratification can 
help select patients appropriate for diagnostic imag-
ing. In the absence of shock, diagnostic evaluation 
depends on the clinical assessment of pretest prob-
ability.3 Several prediction rules are available that add 
predictive value to clinical assessment.4 D-dimers are 
highly sensitive but not very specific for the diagno-
sis of PE in ED patients. Measurement of D-dimers, 
using age- and sex-specific cutoffs, may be useful 
in patients at low to intermediate pretest probability; 
those with negative D-dimers can probably be dis-
charged without further testing, whereas those with 
positive values should be considered for CTA.2
4.2.3. Acute Chest Pain With Suspected 
Myopericarditis
Recommendations for Acute Chest Pain With Suspected 
Myopericarditis
Referenced studies that support the recommendations are 
summarized in Online Data Supplement 24.
COR LOE Recommendations
1 B-NR1. In patients with acute chest pain and 
myocardial injury who have nonobstructive 
coronary arteries on anatomic testing, CMR  
with gadolinium contrast is effective to 
distinguish myopericarditis from other 
causes, including myocardial infarction and 
nonobstructive coronary arteries (MINOCA).1-6
1 B-NR2. In patients with acute chest pain with suspected 
acute myopericarditis, CMR is useful if there 
is diagnostic uncertainty, or to determine 
the presence and extent of myocardial and 
pericardial inflammation and fibrosis.7-12
1 C-EO3. In patients with acute chest pain and suspected 
myopericarditis, TTE is effective to determine 
the presence of ventricular wall motion 
abnormalities, pericardial effusion, valvular 
abnormalities, or restrictive physiology.
2b C-LD4. In patients with acute chest pain with 
suspected acute pericarditis, noncontrast 
or contrast cardiac CT scanning may be 
reasonable to determine the presence and 
degree of pericardial thickening.7 ,8,13
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on November 12, 2025

Circulation. 2021;144:e368–e454. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000001029 November 30, 2021 e403
Gulati et al 2021 Chest Pain GuidelineCLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINESSynopsis
Pericarditis and myocarditis share overlapping com-
mon causes and likely form a continuum.8 In patients 
with pericarditis, a minimally elevated troponin does not 
appear to confer a worse prognosis.14 Most cases of 
pericarditis in developed nations are viral, although tuber-
culosis is sometimes a consideration.
Pericarditis classically presents with chest pain that 
is sharp, pleuritic, and which may be improved by sitting 
up or leaning forward, although in many instances such 
findings are not present. A pericardial friction rub may be 
audible. Widespread ST-elevation with PR depression is 
the electrocardiographic hallmark, although changes are 
nonspecific and may be transient.
Clinical manifestations of myocarditis are varied 
and include chest pain that is often sharp and reflec-
tive of epicardial inflammation involving the pericar-
dium. Myocardial dysfunction often causes fatigue 
and exercise intolerance, and predominance of heart 
failure distinguishes myocarditis from pericarditis. Tro-
ponin is usually elevated.15
Recommendation-Specific Supportive Text
1. CMR with late gadolinium enhancement imaging 
can show characteristic changes of acute myo-
pericarditis, especially if performed early, within 2 
weeks of the index presentation. CMR can also 
frequently distinguish between acute myopericar-
ditis, other cardiomyopathies, and occult MI and 
other causes of MI and nonobstructive coronary 
arteries.1,2
2. In patients with suspected acute myopericarditis, 
or if there is diagnostic uncertainty, CMR is use-
ful to determine myocardial edema, thickening, and 
late enhancement. CMR may also show evidence 
of pericardial effusions.2,16 CMR has a sensitivity 
of 94% to 100% in detecting inflammation of the 
pericardium.7-10 CMR features that are suggestive 
of acute pericarditis include enhancement or thick-
ened pericardium, although such findings can also 
be seen in the presence of pericardial fibrosis. In 
addition, increased signal on T2-weighted images 
correlates with edema, which may be seen in acute 
myopericarditis. The presence of pericardial adhe-
sions between the visceral and parietal pericar-
dium may be useful in patients with suspected 
acute pericarditis or pericardial constriction.7-10
3. In patients with suspected myopericarditis, echo-
cardiography may show segmental left ventricu-
lar wall hypokinesis, which suggests myocardial 
involvement in patients with myocarditis and is, 
therefore, a useful tool in these patients. Patients 
with acute pericarditis may also have echocar-
diographic findings such as increased pericardial brightness or pericardial effusion with or without 
tamponade physiology. Some patients with acute 
pericarditis may also have normal echocardio-
graphic findings.9,17
4. In patients with suspected acute pericarditis, car-
diac CT with or without contrast may show features 
that are suggestive of acute pericarditis, such as 
pericardial thickening or enhancement (after con-
trast administration). Additionally, CT attenuation 
values of pericardial effusion can help distinguish 
between exudative and transudative pericar-
dial fluid. There are limited data on the accuracy 
of cardiac CT in diagnosing acute pericarditis; a 
small study showed that pericardial thickening 
or enhancement was the most accurate single 
parameter for pericarditis, with sensitivity of 54% 
to 59% and specificity of 91% to 96%. Therefore, 
cardiac CT is a reasonable second-line study in 
these patients.7 ,8,13
4.2.4. Acute Chest Pain With Valvular Heart  
Disease (VHD)
Recommendations for Acute Chest Pain With VHD
COR LOE Recommendations
1 C-EO1. In patients presenting with acute chest pain 
with suspected or known history of VHD, TTE 
is useful in determining the presence, severity, 
and cause of VHD.
1 C-EO2. In patients presenting with acute chest pain 
with suspected or known VHD in whom TTE 
diagnostic quality is inadequate, TEE (with 3D 
imaging if available) is useful in determining the 
severity and cause of VHD.
2a C-EO3. In patients presenting with acute chest pain 
with known or suspected VHD, CMR imaging 
is reasonable as an alternative to TTE and/or 
TEE is nondiagnostic.
Synopsis
Chest pain may occur in the presence of VHD, particular-
ly stenotic VHD such as aortic valve stenosis and mitral 
valve stenosis with secondary pulmonary hypertension. 
Chest pain may also occur after papillary muscle rupture 
in the setting of MI or in acute degenerative mitral valve 
disease after spontaneous chordal rupture. Chest pain 
may also occur in the setting of acute severe aortic insuf-
ficiency, which may be related to acute aortic pathology 
such as an aortic dissection manifesting as severe acute 
chest pain that may radiate to the back.
The cause of chest pain in patients with aortic valve 
stenosis may be secondary to coexisting obstructive 
epicardial CAD1 or, more commonly, chest pain may 
occur as a result of coronary microvascular dysfunc-
tion2 in the presence of very elevated left ventricular 
pressure caused by a high left ventricular afterload, 
along with the associated left ventricular hypertrophy. 
The cause of chest pain in patients with severe mitral 
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on November 12, 2025

November 30, 2021 Circulation. 2021;144:e368–e454. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000001029 e404
Gulati et al 2021 Chest Pain GuidelineCLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINESvalve stenosis is more likely to be secondary to epi-
cardial obstructive CAD1 although, less likely, chest 
pain may occur in isolated mitral valve stenosis result-
ing from low cardiac output and decreased coronary 
perfusion.1
Recommendation-Specific Supportive Text
1. Patients with VHD may present with chest pain 
particularly in the setting of stenotic VHD, severe 
valvular regurgitation in the setting of AMI with 
ruptured papillary muscle resulting in acute severe 
mitral valve insufficiency, or acute aortic valve 
insufficiency in the setting of acute aortic pathol-
ogy, such as aortic dissection.3,4 TTE is useful in 
assessing valvular pathologies because it is widely 
available and is therefore a good first-line test in 
these patients to determine the presence, severity, 
and cause of VHD.3
2. The ability to attain adequate 3-dimensional (3D) 
transthoracic images depends on the ability to 
obtain adequate 2-dimensional images.5 In these 
clinical situations where TTE images are technically 
inadequate, TEE with 3D images, if required, is use-
ful to determine the severity and cause of VHD.3,6
3. There may be clinical situations when TTE and 
TEE may not be technically adequate to assess 
the severity and cause of VHD. In such circum-
stances, CMR may be useful to objectively assess 
the severity and cause of VHD.6 The aorta can also 
be visualized on CMR and can therefore be used 
to assess acute aortic pathologies accompanying 
aortic valve insufficiency such as aortic dissection.4
4.3. Evaluation of Acute Chest Pain With 
Suspected Noncardiac Causes
Recommendation for Evaluation of Acute Chest Pain With Suspected 
Noncardiac Causes
COR LOE Recommendation
1 C-EO1. Patients with acute chest pain should be evaluated 
for noncardiac causes if they have persistent or 
recurring symptoms despite a negative stress 
test or anatomic cardiac evaluation, or a low-risk 
designation by a CDP.
Synopsis
The differential diagnosis for noncardiac causes of acute 
chest pain is quite broad and includes respiratory, muscu-
loskeletal, gastrointestinal, psychological, and other causes 
(Table 9). Of these, musculoskeletal causes are the most 
common, including costochondritis, muscle strain, and 
potential consequences of recent or occult chest trauma 
such as rib fracture. Various gastrointestinal causes, com-monly esophageal, can present with chest pain, including 
gastrointestinal reflux and esophageal dysmotility as well 
as gastritis from either medications or peptic ulcer disease. 
Respiratory causes are less frequent but potentially more 
serious and include PE, pneumonia, and pneumothorax. 
Many patients will have dyspnea in addition to chest pain. 
Psychological causes are usually diagnoses of exclusion 
but merit consideration in the right context.Table 9. Differential Diagnosis of Noncardiac Chest Pain
Respiratory
Pulmonary embolism
Pneumothorax/hemothorax
Pneumomediastinum
Pneumonia
Bronchitis
Pleural irritation
Malignancy
Gastrointestinal
Cholecystitis
Pancreatitis
Hiatal hernia
Gastroesophageal reflux disease/gastritis/esophagitis
Peptic ulcer disease
Esophageal spasm
Dyspepsia
Chest wall
Costochondritis
Chest wall trauma or inflammation
Herpes zoster (shingles)
Cervical radiculopathy
Breast disease
Rib fracture
Musculoskeletal injury/spasm
Psychological
Panic disorder
Anxiety
Clinical depression
Somatization disorder
Hypochondria
Other
Hyperventilation syndrome
Carbon monoxide poisoning
Sarcoidosis
Lead poisoning
Prolapsed intervertebral disc
Thoracic outlet syndrome
Adverse effect of certain medications (eg, 5-fluorouracil)
 Sickle cell crisis
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on November 12, 2025

Circulation. 2021;144:e368–e454. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000001029 November 30, 2021 e405
Gulati et al 2021 Chest Pain GuidelineCLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINESRecommendation-Specific Supportive Text
1. If acute myocardial injury is ruled out, alternative 
diagnoses merit consideration in patients with 
persistent or recurrent symptoms. Clinical risk 
assessment, with implementation of CDPs when 
appropriate, is the key to selecting patients for 
further diagnostic evaluation and also to choosing 
among potential diagnostic modalities.
4.3.1. Evaluation of Acute Chest Pain With 
Suspected Gastrointestinal Syndromes
Recommendation for Evaluation of Acute Chest Pain With Suspected 
Gastrointestinal Syndromes
COR LOE Recommendation
2a C-LD1. In patients with recurrent acute chest pain 
without evidence of a cardiac or pulmonary 
cause, evaluation for gastrointestinal causes is 
reasonable.
Synopsis
Among outpatients who present with chest pain, ap-
proximately 10% to 20% have a gastrointestinal cause.1 
Gastrointestinal pain may result from stimulation of 
chemoreceptors by acid or hyperosmolar substances, 
of mechanoreceptors by abnormal contraction or dis-
tention, or of thermoreceptors.2 Some patients have ab-
normal perceptions of otherwise normal stimuli. Gastro-
esophageal reflux disease is the most likely cause for 
recurring unexplained chest pain of esophageal origin.3 
Chest pain caused by gastroesophageal reflux disease 
can mimic myocardial ischemia and may be described 
as squeezing or burning. The duration can be minutes 
to hours, often occurs after meals or at night, and can 
worsen with stress. Depending on the severity, it may or 
may not resolve spontaneously or with antacids. Esoph-
agitis not related to reflux may be caused by medica-
tions, underlying infections such as candidiasis, or ra-
diation injury. Allergic conditions are associated with 
eosinophilic esophagitis, which is diagnosed by biopsy. 
Esophageal motility disorders such as achalasia, distal 
esophageal spasm, and nutcracker esophagus are less 
common but can present as squeezing retrosternal pain 
or spasm, often accompanied by dysphagia.
Recommendation-Specific Supportive Text
1. The first step in evaluation of potential esopha-
geal chest pain is a careful history. Although the 
clinical presentation often does not provide ade-
quate clues to distinguish cardiac from esopha-
geal pain, some symptoms may be suggestive of 
an esophageal cause, such as heartburn, regur-
gitation, or dysphagia, and relief with antacid or antisecretory agents. These symptoms, however, 
are not sufficiently specific to be fully diagnos-
tic. A history of use of medications such as non-
steroidal anti-inflammatory agents, potassium 
supplements, iron, or bisphosphonates should 
be sought. Physical examination is often unre-
vealing. When an esophageal cause of chest 
pain is suspected, upper endoscopy should be 
considered.4 Symptoms and signs that merit 
early evaluation (usually within 2 weeks) include 
dysphagia, odynophagia, gastrointestinal bleed-
ing, unexplained iron deficiency anemia, weight 
loss, and recurrent vomiting. Patients without 
these symptoms may merit a trial of empiric acid 
suppression therapy.5 If an upper endoscopy is 
normal and the symptoms persist despite a trial 
of acid suppression, consideration should be 
given to additional evaluation, such as esoph-
ageal function testing and pH monitoring, to 
exclude other esophageal causes.6
4.3.2. Evaluation of Acute Chest Pain With 
Suspected Anxiety and Other Psychosomatic 
Considerations
Recommendation for Evaluation of Acute Chest Pain With Suspected 
Anxiety and Other Psychosomatic Considerations
Referenced studies that support the recommendation are summarized 
in Online Data Supplement 25.
COR LOE Recommendation
2a B-R1. For patients with recurrent, similar 
presentations for acute chest pain with no 
evidence of a physiological cause on prior 
diagnostic evaluation including a negative 
workup for myocardial ischemia, referral to a 
cognitive-behavioral therapist is reasonable.1-14
Synopsis
Although the heart-brain relationship is well estab-
lished,15-17 its clinical relevance has been enhanced by 
recognition of stress cardiomyopathy.18,19 Less dramatic 
than the latter syndrome but highly prevalent is recur-
rent chest pain despite angiographically normal coronary 
arteries and no definable cardiac disease, including an 
assessment for INOCA.1-14 Chest pain in these patients 
has been variously labeled angina, angina-like, “atypical” 
angina, or noncardiac chest pain based on its deviation 
from characteristic ischemic cardiac discomfort. Prog-
nosis of patients with noncardiac chest pain is largely 
devoid of cardiac complications.4,9,20-23 The close asso-
ciation of this symptom with psychological syndromes 
such as anxiety, panic attack, depression, somatoform 
disorder, and cardiophobia suggests that there may be a 
psychogenic origin in many patients. These factors have 
also raised consideration of mechanisms for noncardiac 
chest pain such as central nervous system-visceral inter-
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on November 12, 2025

November 30, 2021 Circulation. 2021;144:e368–e454. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000001029 e406
Gulati et al 2021 Chest Pain GuidelineCLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINESactions, low pain thresholds, hyperbody vigilance, sym-
pathetic activation, as well as anxiety, depression, and 
panic disorder.6,7 ,9,14,23-30 It has been reported that these 
patients undergo extensive and repetitive cardiac testing 
and have low referral to cognitive-behavioral therapists, 
suggesting a lost opportunity for pharmacologic or cog-
nitive-behavioral therapy.6
Recommendation-Specific Supportive Text
1. Most low-risk patients presenting to the ED or office 
setting with chest pain do not have life-threatening 
conditions. Diagnoses may include psychological 
entities such as somatization or noncardiac chest 
pain.1-13 It has been reported that in low-risk chest 
pain patients without evidence of cardiac disease, 
depression, anxiety, and gastroesophageal syn-
dromes each exceeded CAD by almost 10-fold.7 
Additionally, care of these patients often includes 
multiple tests, high cost, and avoidable radiation 
exposure (5.0 mSv).6 A low rate (<10%) of clini-
cian inquiry, documentation, or referral has also 
been noted for psychological factors, even in chest 
pain patients with self-reported anxiety.6,7 A sys-
tematic review of therapy for patients with chest 
pain, no evidence of cardiac disease, and psycho-
logical disorders revealed that antidepressants 
and anxiolytics had mixed evidence for efficacy,10 
but a Cochrane database of psychotherapy (17 
RCTs) for such patients revealed a 32% reduction 
in chest pain frequency11 for a 3-month interval. 
Approaches using cognitive-behavioral methods 
were most effective.11 These results were limited 
by small study cohorts and patient heterogene-
ity; however, they do suggest benefit from con-
sideration of psychogenic factors in patients who 
continue to seek evaluation for chest pain despite 
previous definitive, negative workups.
4.3.3. Evaluation of Acute Chest Pain in Patients 
With Sickle Cell Disease
Recommendations for Evaluation of Acute Chest Pain in Patients With 
Sickle Cell Disease
Referenced studies that support the recommendations are 
summarized in Online Data Supplement 26.
COR LOE Recommendations
1 B-NR1. In patients with sickle cell disease who report 
acute chest pain, emergency transfer by EMS to 
an acute care setting is recommended.1-5
1 C-LD2. In patients with sickle cell disease who report 
acute chest pain, ACS should be excluded.3-5
Synopsis
Acute chest syndrome is a leading cause of death for 
patients with sickle cell disease.1,2 Patients with sickle 
cell disease who are experiencing chest pain require prompt evaluation.3 Although chest pain occurs in most, 
other manifestations of acute chest syndrome include 
shortness of breath, fever, arm and leg pain, and the 
presence of a new density on chest radiography. Older 
adolescents and adults with sickle cell disease who pres-
ent with chest pain and shortness of breath should be 
evaluated for AMI or myocardial ischemia.4 AMI occurs in 
patients with sickle cell disease at a relatively early age, 
usually without the traditional risk factors for ACS. Death 
from ACS in patients with sickle cell disease is signifi-
cantly high in age-, sex-, and race-matched controls.5
Recommendation-Specific Supportive Text
1. In patients with sickle cell disease who experience 
chest pain, ACS is associated with significant mor-
bidity and mortality rates. These patients should be 
transferred to an acute care setting by EMS when 
there is clinical suspicion of ACS.
2. The recommended diagnostic evaluation for all 
adults with sickle cell disease who have a clinical 
presentation concerning for acute chest syndrome 
includes an ECG, troponin test, complete blood 
count with white blood cell differential, reticulocyte 
count, anteroposterior and lateral chest radiograph, 
and blood and sputum cultures.
5. EVALUATION OF PATIENTS WITH 
STABLE CHEST PAIN
5.1. Patients With No Known CAD Presenting 
With Stable Chest Pain
Stable chest pain is a symptom of myocardial ischemia char-
acterized by chest pain that is provoked with stress (physi-
cal or emotional). Risk status in suspected stable ischemic 
heart disease (SIHD) is not well defined. Figure 11 provides 
a description of SIHD risk estimates.1
5.1.1. Pretest Risk Probability to Guide Need for 
Stress and Anatomic Tests
In the evaluation of symptomatic patients with sus-
pected CAD, use of validated scores to predict the 
pretest probability of obstructive CAD may be use-
ful to identify low-risk patients for whom testing may 
be deferred. It is preferable to use contemporary es-
timates such as those published in the past 10 years, 
such as the pretest probability proposed by Juarez-
Orozco et al.1 in preference to scores from historical 
patient series, which may overestimate the frequency 
of obstructive CAD. Alternatively, low-risk patients 
may be those <40 years of age or who have symp-
toms that have a low likelihood of representing isch-
emia (Section 5.1.2). When available, information on 
the presence and amount of CAC may be useful for 
enhancing the pretest probability of obstructive CAD, 
as shown in Figure 11.2 This information can be ob-
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on November 12, 2025

Circulation. 2021;144:e368–e454. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000001029 November 30, 2021 e407
Gulati et al 2021 Chest Pain GuidelineCLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINEStained from performing a CAC scan or, when avail-
able, from a visual estimation of CAC based on prior 
noncardiac chest CT. Among the remaining patients 
classified as intermediate-high risk, selective testing 
may improve diagnosis of CAD and for risk stratifica-
tion purposes.1-5
5.1.2. Low-Risk Patients With Stable Chest Pain and 
No Known CAD
Recommendations for Low-Risk Patients With Stable Chest Pain and 
No Known CAD
Referenced studies that support the recommendations are 
summarized in Online Data Supplements 27 and 28.
COR LOE Recommendations
1 B-NR1. For patients with stable chest pain and no 
known CAD presenting to the outpatient clinic, 
a model to estimate pretest probability of 
obstructive CAD is effective to identify patients 
at low risk for obstructive CAD and favorable 
prognosis in whom additional diagnostic testing 
can be deferred.1-5
2a B-R2. For patients with stable chest pain and no 
known CAD categorized as low risk, CAC 
testing is reasonable as a first-line test for 
excluding calcified plaque and identifying 
patients with a low likelihood of obstructive 
CAD.6-9
2a B-NR3. For patients with stable chest pain and no 
known CAD categorized as low risk, exercise 
testing without imaging is reasonable as 
a first-line test for excluding myocardial 
ischemia and determining functional capacity 
in patients with an interpretable ECG.10Synopsis
Over the past several decades, patient presentation and 
observed obstructive CAD prevalence has changed, thus 
affecting patient selection for diagnostic testing. Current 
observations in the United States include:
• T ypical exertional angina prevalence is gener-
ally low (<10%), with more patients presenting 
without the classic demand-related symptoms.11 
Symptoms can be infrequent (ie, on a weekly or 
monthly basis),12,13 which challenges the diagnostic 
evaluation.
• Among patients undergoing a diagnostic evalua-
tion, there is a relatively low prevalence of obstruc-
tive CAD and ischemia (ie, ∼10%).11,14,15
• Traditional pretest risk scores largely overes-
timate disease probability and contribute to 
overtesting.16-19
• Current testing patterns result in a high normal 
coronary angiography rate (upward of 50%–
60%).20,21 For the aforementioned reasons, use 
of a contemporary pretest probability estimates 
to define low-risk patients not requiring additional 
diagnostic testing is a primary goal of the initial 
evaluation of symptomatic patients with suspected 
CAD.5 Even when contemporary pretest probability 
estimates are used, they have a low specificity for 
identifying patients with obstructive CAD. A CAC 
score of zero can be useful to identify patients with 
stable chest pain who are low risk, have a low likeli-
hood of obstructive CAD, and a low risk of future 
Figure 11. Pretest Probabilities of 
Obstructive CAD in Symptomatic 
Patients According to Age, Sex, and 
Symptoms
Modified from Juarez-Orozco et al1 and 
Winther et al.2 1) The pretest probability 
shown is for patients with anginal 
symptoms. Patients with lower-risk 
symptoms would be expected to have 
lower pretest probability. 2) The darker 
green– and orange-shaded regions denote 
the groups in which noninvasive testing is 
most beneficial (pretest probability >15%). 
The light green–shaded regions denote 
the groups with pretest probability of CAD 
≤15% in which the testing for diagnosis 
may be considered based on clinical 
judgment.1 3) If CAC is available, it can also 
be used to estimate the pretest probability 
based on CAC score.2 CAC indicates 
coronary artery calcium; and CAD, coronary 
artery disease.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on November 12, 2025

November 30, 2021 Circulation. 2021;144:e368–e454. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000001029 e408
Gulati et al 2021 Chest Pain GuidelineCLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINEScardiovascular events.7 Additionally, exercise test-
ing without imaging is also reasonable to perform 
in low-risk individuals with stable chest pain and no 
known CAD to exclude myocardial ischemia and 
assess functional capacity10 (Figure 12).
Recommendation-Specific Supportive Text
1. There are several pretest probability scores for 
use in symptomatic patients with suspected 
CAD. Older pretest probability scores, such as 
the Diamond-Forrester model developed in 1979, 
estimates the probability of obstructive CAD, 
resulting in significant overestimation in contem-
porary patients referred for noninvasive imaging, 
particularly women.1 Newer pretest probability 
estimates are available.4 The CAD Consortium 
models include basic (age, sex, symptoms, and 
hospital setting); clinical (basic model + risk fac-
tors: diabetes, hypertension, hyperlipidemia, and 
smoking); and extended (clinical model + CAC) 
versions. Each new variant is better than older 
models, and the addition of variables within each 
model level improves prediction.3 A major strength 
of these models is the extensive validation in dif-
ferent hospitals, settings, and countries. Another 
updated model to estimate the pretest probability 
of obstructive CAD was recently developed4,22 and 
has been recommended by the ESC guidelines, 
further reinforcing that the prevalence of obstruc-
tive CAD among symptomatic patients is substan-
tially lower than predicted estimates.
2. Among symptomatic patients, a CAC score of zero 
identifies a low-risk cohort of patients who may not 
require additional diagnostic testing; most events 
occur among patients with detectable CAC (eg, 
84% in the PROMISE trial).7, 9 Several randomized 
trials evaluated the role of CAC in guiding selective 
use of follow-up testing, including CCTA.6,7 From 
the CRESCENT 1 (Comprehensive Cardiac CT 
Versus Exercise Testing in Suspected Coronary 
Artery Disease) trial, 350 symptomatic patients 
were randomized to CAC scanning versus exer-
cise ECGs.7 Only patients with detectable CAC or 
high pretest risk (141/242) underwent follow-up 
CCTA. At 1 year, the CAC arm was associated with 
a reduction in cardiovascular disease events when 
compared with those who underwent exercise 
testing alone (P=0.011).
3. Exercise testing was shown to be an effective 
diagnostic strategy in low-risk symptomatic women 
from the WOMEN (What Is the Optimal Method for 
Ischemia Evaluation in Women) trial, when com-
pared with exercise MPI.10 Using this approach, 
there was no significant difference in CAD death 
or hospitalization for an ACS or heart failure, with either test, but exercise testing alone provided sig-
nificant cost savings.
5.1.3. Intermediate-High Risk Patients With Stable 
Chest Pain and No Known CAD
Recommendations for Intermediate-High Risk Patients With Stable 
Chest Pain and No Known CAD
Referenced studies that support the recommendations are 
summarized in Online Data Supplements 29 and 30.
COR LOE Recommendations
Index Diagnostic Testing
Anatomic Testing
1 A1. For intermediate-high risk patients with stable 
chest pain and no known CAD, CCTA is effective 
for diagnosis of CAD, for risk stratification, and for 
guiding treatment decisions.1-12
Stress Testing
1 B-R2. For intermediate-high risk patients with stable 
chest pain and no known CAD, stress imaging 
(stress echocardiography, PET/SPECT MPI or 
CMR) is effective for diagnosis of myocardial 
ischemia and for estimating risk of MACE.8,13-35
2a B-R3. For intermediate-high risk patients with stable 
chest pain and no known CAD for whom 
rest/stress nuclear MPI is selected, PET is 
reasonable in preference to SPECT, if available 
to improve diagnostic accuracy and decrease 
the rate of nondiagnostic test results.36-39
2a B-R4. For intermediate-high risk patients with 
stable chest pain and no known CAD with 
an interpretable ECG and ability to achieve 
maximal levels of exercise (≥5 METs), exercise 
electrocardiography is reasonable.8,13,15,40-45
2b B-NR5. In intermediate-high risk patients with stable 
chest pain selected for stress MPI using 
SPECT, the use of attenuation correction or 
prone imaging may be reasonable to decrease 
the rate of false-positive findings.46-51
Assessment of Left Ventricular Function
1 B-NR6. In intermediate-high risk patients with stable 
chest pain who have pathological Q waves, 
symptoms or signs suggestive of heart failure, 
complex ventricular arrhythmias, or a heart 
murmur with unclear diagnosis, use of TTE is 
effective for diagnosis of resting left ventricular 
systolic and diastolic ventricular function and 
detection of myocardial, valvular, and pericardial 
abnormalities.13,14,52
Sequential or Add-on Testing: What to Do if Index Test Results are Positive 
or Inconclusive
2a B-NR7 . For intermediate-high risk patients with stable 
chest pain and known coronary stenosis of 
40% to 90% in a proximal or middle coronary 
segment on CCTA, FFR-CT can be useful for 
diagnosis of vessel-specific ischemia and to 
guide decision-making regarding the use of 
coronary revascularization.12,53-58
2a B-NR8. For intermediate-high risk patients with stable 
chest pain after an inconclusive or abnormal 
exercise ECG or stress imaging study, CCTA is 
reasonable.5,59-63
2a B-NR9. For intermediate-high risk patients with stable 
chest pain and no known CAD undergoing 
stress testing, the addition of CAC testing can 
be useful.64-70
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on November 12, 2025

Circulation. 2021;144:e368–e454. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000001029 November 30, 2021 e409
Gulati et al 2021 Chest Pain GuidelineCLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINES2a B-NR10. For intermediate-high risk patients with stable 
chest pain after inconclusive CCTA, stress 
imaging is reasonable.13,14,20-23,40,71-76
2b C-EO11. For intermediate-high risk patients with  
stable chest pain after a negative stress test 
but with high clinical suspicion of CAD, CCTA 
or ICA may be reasonable.Synopsis
The approach to the diagnostic evaluation of patients with 
no known CAD who are at intermediate to high risk (Fig-
ure 12) should be guided by the ability to achieve high-
quality imaging as well as local availability and expertise. 
Intermediate-high risk patients have modest rates of ob-
structive CAD (∼10%–20%) and risk of clinical events 
(∼1%–2% per year).1,5,8,77-80 CCTA is preferable in those 
<65 years of age and not on optimal preventive thera-
pies, while stress testing may be advantageous in those 
Figure 12. Clinical Decision Pathway for Patients With Stable Chest Pain and No Known CAD
Test choice should be guided by local availability and expertise. 
*Test choice guided by patient’s exercise capacity, resting electrocardiographic abnormalities; CCTA preferable in those <65 years of age and not on 
optimal preventive therapies; stress testing favored in those ≥ 65 years of age (with a higher likelihood of ischemia). †High-risk CAD means left main 
stenosis ≥50%; anatomically significant 3-vessel disease (≥ 70% stenosis).
CAD indicates coronary artery disease; CCTA, coronary CT angiography; CMR, cardiovascular magnetic resonance imaging; CT, computed 
tomography; FFR-CT, fractional flow reserve with CT; GDMT, guideline-directed medical therapy; INOCA, ischemia and no obstructive CAD; PET, 
positron emission tomography; and SPECT, single-photon emission CT.
Recommendations for Intermediate-High Risk Patients With Stable 
Chest Pain and No Known CAD (Continued)
Sequential or Add-on Testing: What to Do if Index Test Results are Positive or 
Inconclusive (continued)
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on November 12, 2025

November 30, 2021 Circulation. 2021;144:e368–e454. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000001029 e410
Gulati et al 2021 Chest Pain GuidelineCLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINES≥65 years of age, because they have a higher likelihood 
of ischemia and obstructive CAD.34-36,81-83 Although pre-
vious guidelines supported direct referral to ICA among 
patients with stable chest pain, contemporary random-
ized trials support that candidates for elective coronary 
angiography may be safely triaged using CCTA1,84 or 
noninvasive stress testing.34,35
Patient characteristics and existing contraindica-
tions for a given test modality (Tables 5 and 6) should 
be considered when choosing a diagnostic test. Imaging 
of obese patients, especially those with morbid obesity 
(body mass index >40), can be challenging and requires 
careful consideration of available equipment. In obese 
patients, contrast enhancement is useful to improve 
imaging quality. In certain patients, it may be important to 
undergo exercise testing so to collect data on the hemo-
dynamic or symptomatic response to exercise. In patients 
selected for stress imaging who are able to exercise, 
exercise testing is preferred over pharmacologic stress 
to improve the diagnostic and prognostic information 
of the test. Although PET and SPECT are grouped 
together, PET has improved diagnostic and prognostic 
performance, especially when quantitative assessment 
of MBF can be performed.36-39
Irrespective of the test performed, an overarching goal 
of the evaluation of symptomatic patients is to identify 
those who would benefit from GDMT, as defined by the 
2014 SIHD guidelines, the 2018 cholesterol-lowering 
guidelines, and the 2019 prevention guidelines.13,85-87 
For this evaluation, the patient should be engaged in a 
process of shared decision-making before determining 
the final choice of the cardiac test modality and in guid-
ing the pathway for treatment decisions.
Recommendation-Specific Supportive Text
Anatomic Testing
1. Clinical trials report a higher diagnostic sensitivity 
for CCTA compared with stress testing for detect-
ing obstructive CAD on ICA.2-4,37 ,38,88 CCTA with-
out stenosis or plaque has a low CAD event rate. 
From the PROMISE trial, the 3-year CAD event 
rate for negative test findings was 0.9% for CCTA 
versus 2.1% for stress testing.17Randomized tri-
als comparing the effectiveness of CCTA versus 
stress testing report similar near-term effective-
ness (at ∼2–3 years of follow-up).7 ,8,10-12,89 In the 
SCOT-HEART (Scottish Computed Tomography 
of the Heart) trial, the addition of CCTA to stan-
dard of care resulted in a reduction in 5-year CAD 
death or AMI when compared with standard care 
alone (predominantly exercise ECG) (HR: 0.59; 
95% CI: 0.41-0.84; P=0.004).9 From a prespeci-
fied analysis from the PROMISE trial, patients with 
diabetes who underwent CCTA had a lower risk of 
cardiovascular death or MI when compared with those randomized to stress testing (adjusted HR: 
0.38; 95% CI: 0.18-0.79; P=0.01).6 Especially for 
patients with nonobstructive and obstructive CAD, 
CCTA more often prompts initiation and intensifi-
cation of preventive and anti-ischemic therapies 
than other diagnostic strategies.6,89-96 Several 
randomized trials compared the effectiveness of 
CCTA versus direct referral to ICA among symp-
tomatic patients.1,5 From the CONSERVE trial, a 
strategy of initial CCTA was associated with lower 
cost but similar 1-year MACE rates (death, ACS, 
stroke, urgent/emergency coronary revasculariza-
tion, or cardiac hospitalization) as direct ICA (4.6% 
versus 4.6%).5
Stress Testing
2. The prognostic value of stress echocardiography 
has been demonstrated in large observational 
series with low rates of CAD events for patients 
with normal test results, particularly those with 
good exercise tolerance.71,72,97-99 In the PROMISE 
trial, patients randomized to stress testing had 
no difference in the primary outcome of death, 
ACS, or major procedural complications as com-
pared to CCTA.100 For stress nuclear imaging, 
multicenter registries support effective risk strati-
fication based on rest/stress measures of MPI 
and left ventricular function,13,21,27 ,28,98,101,102 with 
recent evidence on the prognostic value of stress 
PET.26,37 ,38,103,104 Randomized trials have compared 
the effectiveness of rest/stress MPI with other 
noninvasive tests, such as CMR105 and CCTA, 
revealing similar 1- to 3-year outcomes. Two mul-
ticenter trials have evaluated the effectiveness of 
a CMR-guided strategy as compared to standard 
testing approaches.34,35 The CE-MARC 2 multi-
center trial (n=1 202) revealed that both CMR and 
SPECT MPI were associated with similar rates (ie, 
7 .1%–7 .5%) of unnecessary invasive angiography 
(defined as a no CAD stenosis ≥70% or a normal 
invasive FFR) compared with standard testing for 
chest pain (28.8%; P<0.001).34 The MR-INFORM 
trial randomized 918 patients with typical angina 
and multiple risk factors or a positive exercise ECG 
to a CMR strategy versus invasive FFR strategy.35 
The CMR strategy was associated with less coro-
nary revascularization (P=0.005) and a similar 
event rate (death, AMI, or target vessel revascular-
ization; P=0.91).
3. Although PET and SPECT are grouped together, 
PET has improved diagnostic and prognostic per-
formance, especially when quantitative assessment 
of MBF can be performed.36-39 A recent clinical trial 
(n=475) reported a higher diagnostic accuracy 
with stress PET MPI compared with other stress 
test modalities.38
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on November 12, 2025

Circulation. 2021;144:e368–e454. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000001029 November 30, 2021 e411
Gulati et al 2021 Chest Pain GuidelineCLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINES4. Diagnostic accuracy of the exercise ECG is lower 
(ie, sensitivity and specificity range, 60%–77%) 
than stress imaging, but prognostication remains 
a useful goal.13,41 In the WOMEN trial including 
824 symptomatic women, exercise ECG was 
equally effective when compared with exercise 
SPECT MPI, with similar 2-year CAD event rates 
(2.0% versus 2.3%; P=0.59).40 Failure to com-
plete the first stage of the Bruce protocol (or <5 
METs) or to achieve 85% of age-predicted fitness 
level increases CAD event risk.13,41-45 Patients 
exercising to Bruce stage III or >10 METs with 
a negative ECG have a low risk of CAD events. 
In patients with submaximal exercise or for those 
with an ischemic ECG ≥ 1.0 mm ST depression, 
additional stress imaging may improve risk detec-
tion and guide clinical management.41 Marked 
ischemia (eg, ≥2.0 mm at reduced workloads) or 
high Duke or Lauer scores signify increased risk 
among women and men13,41,42,44; such patients 
may benefit from additional testing (anatomic or 
stress testing).
5. Use of attenuation correction algorithms and prone 
imaging can reduce MPI artifacts.46-51
Assessment of Left Ventricular Function
6. Clinical practice guidelines and appropriate use 
criteria support use of TTE as appropriate for 
the assessment of regional and global left ven-
tricular function.13,14 The likelihood of abnormal 
findings increases when TTE is performed selec-
tively among higher risk patients, such as those 
with electrocardiographic Q waves or heart failure 
symptoms, complex ventricular arrhythmias, or a 
heart murmur.52
Sequential or Add-on Testing: What to Do if Index 
Test Results are Positive or Inconclusive
7 . The use of FFR-CT is supported by several stud-
ies,56,57 ,104 including one reporting improved diag-
nostic accuracy with FFR-CT versus coronary CT 
alone when applying invasive FFR as the gold 
standard.56 Several multinational registries have 
examined the utility of FFR-CT with regards to 
guiding clinical decision-making and the safety 
of deferring coronary revascularization in patients 
with a negative FFR-CT.12,26,53,54 In the ADVANCE 
registry, FFR-CT changed treatment recommen-
dations in two-thirds of 5 083 patients, and there 
were no MACE at 90 days for patients with a 
negative FFR-CT.54 FFR-CT is most beneficial 
when measured in a coronary stenosis of 40% to 
90% severity located in a proximal or mid-coronary 
artery segment.54,106,107
8. Use of CCTA after stress testing can diagnose 
or exclude obstructive CAD and identify patients 
who may benefit from referral to ICA.5,59-61,63 The ISCHEMIA trial used CCTA after site-determined 
moderate-severe ischemia to exclude patients with 
nonobstructive CAD and identifying those with sig-
nificant left main stenosis who benefit from prompt 
referral to ICA.63,108 Half of the screen failures 
for the ISCHEMIA trial were identified by CCTA 
including those with nonobstructive CAD or unpro-
tected left main CAD.
 9. Observational registry data suggest that adding 
CAC can improve risk assessment, reduce diagnos-
tic uncertainty, help detect atherosclerotic plaque, 
and guide preventive management.64-70,94,109,110
10. After an initial exercise ECG, data support an 
improved diagnostic accuracy and improved risk 
stratification with further stress imaging, such 
as with stress echocardiography,13,14,71,72 nuclear 
MPI,20-23,40,73-76 or CMR.35,111-113
11. For the symptomatic patients with negative stress 
test findings, selective use of CCTA or invasive 
coronary angiography can help detect obstructive 
CAD and atherosclerotic plaque and reduce diag-
nostic certainty.
5.2. Patients With Known CAD Presenting With 
Stable Chest Pain
Recommendations for Patients With Known CAD Presenting With 
Stable Chest Pain
Referenced studies that support the recommendations are 
summarized in Online Data Supplement 31.
COR LOE Recommendations
1 A1. For patients with obstructive CAD and stable 
chest pain, it is recommended to optimize 
GDMT.1-3
1 C-EO2. For patients with known nonobstructive CAD 
and stable chest pain, it is recommended to 
optimize preventive therapies.4,5
Synopsis
In patients with known CAD, clinicians should opt to in-
tensify GDMT first, if there is an opportunity to do so, 
and defer testing. Although GDMT exists for obstructive 
CAD, there are no current guidelines that are specific 
to nonobstructive CAD. Thus, adhering to atherosclerotic 
CV prevention guidelines is recommended.4,5
Recommendation-Specific Supportive Text
1. ACC/AHA clinical practice guidelines for treat-
ment of patients with stable CAD recommend opti-
mization of anti-ischemic and preventive therapies 
with the goal to reduce the patient’s angina burden 
and improve clinical outcomes.6,7
2. For all patients with a history of CAD risk fac-
tors, optimized preventive therapy should be 
used according to ACC/AHA clinical practice 
guidelines.4,5
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on November 12, 2025

November 30, 2021 Circulation. 2021;144:e368–e454. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000001029 e412
Gulati et al 2021 Chest Pain GuidelineCLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINES5.2.1. Patients With Obstructive CAD Who Present 
With Stable Chest Pain
Recommendations for Patients With Obstructive CAD Who Present 
With Stable Chest Pain
Referenced studies that support the recommendations are 
summarized in Online Data Supplements 32 and 33.
COR LOE Recommendations
Index Diagnostic Testing
Anatomic Testing
1 A1. For patients with obstructive CAD who have 
stable chest pain despite GDMT and moderate-
severe ischemia, ICA is recommended for 
guiding therapeutic decision-making.1-4
1 A2. For patients with obstructive CAD who have 
stable chest pain despite optimal GDMT, those 
referred for ICA without prior stress testing 
benefit from FFR or instantaneous wave free 
ratio.3,5-7
1 B-R3. For symptomatic patients with obstructive 
CAD who have stable chest pain with CCTA-
defined ≥50% stenosis in the left main 
coronary artery, obstructive CAD with FFR 
with CT ≤ 0.80, or severe stenosis (≥ 70%) in 
all 3 main vessels, ICA is effective for guiding 
therapeutic decision-making.4,8
2a B-NR4. For patients who have stable chest pain with 
previous coronary revascularization, CCTA is 
reasonable to evaluate bypass graft or stent 
patency (for stents ≥3 mm).9-13
Stress Testing
1 B-NR5. For patients with obstructive CAD who have 
stable chest pain despite optimal GDMT, stress 
PET/SPECT MPI, CMR, or echocardiography 
is recommended for diagnosis of myocardial 
ischemia, estimating risk of MACE, and guiding 
therapeutic decision-making.14-36
2a B-R6. For patients with obstructive CAD who have 
stable chest pain despite optimal GDMT, when 
selected for rest/stress nuclear MPI, PET is 
reasonable in preference to SPECT, if available, 
to improve diagnostic accuracy and decrease 
the rate of nondiagnostic test results.37
2a B-NR7 . For patients with obstructive CAD who 
have stable chest pain despite GDMT, 
exercise treadmill testing can be useful to 
determine if the symptoms are consistent 
with angina pectoris, assess the severity 
of symptoms, evaluate functional capacity 
and select management, including cardiac 
rehabilitation.4,38-40
2a B-NR8. For patients with obstructive CAD who have 
stable chest pain symptoms undergoing 
stress PET MPI or stress CMR, the addition 
of MBFR is useful to improve diagnosis 
accuracy and enhance risk stratification.31-36
Synopsis
In patients with known CAD, physicians should opt to 
intensify GDMT first, if there is an opportunity to do 
so, and defer testing. In patients with a history of ob-
structive CAD, previous AMI, or previous coronary re-
vascularization, assessing the severity of ischemia may be useful to guide clinical decision-making regarding 
the use of ICA and intensify preventive and anti-isch-
emic therapy. Imaging should be considered in those 
with new onset or persistent stable chest pain (Figure 
13). In patients with frequent angina or severe stress-
induced ischemia, referral to ICA or CCTA is an op-
tion.4 Among individuals with known obstructive CAD 
or ischemic heart disease who have stable symptoms, 
exercise treadmill testing may be useful for assessing 
functional capacity, assessing the type and severity 
of symptoms, and informing the role of coronary re-
vascularization, cardiac rehabilitation, or anti-anginal 
therapy.4,38-40
Recommendation-Specific Supportive Text
Anatomic Testing
1. SIHD randomized trials reveal a pattern that isch-
emia-guided percutaneous coronary intervention 
(PCI) results in an improvement in angina when 
compared with medical therapy alone.1-4,41 In the 
ISCHEMIA trial, a total of 5179 patients with stable 
CAD and site-determined moderate-severe isch-
emia on stress testing were randomized to invasive 
versus conservative care strategies.4 No differ-
ence in the composite primary MACE endpoint was 
observed at ∼ 3.3 years of follow-up. Patients pre-
senting with daily, weekly, or monthly angina had a 
prompt and durable improvement in symptoms when 
randomized to invasive compared with conservative 
management.41
2. Coronary revascularization after identification of 
suspected lesion-specific ischemia (FFR ≤0.80 or 
instantaneous wave-free ratio ≤0.89) in obstruc-
tive CAD is associated with improved event-free 
survival compared with the use of PCI determined 
by anatomy alone.3,5,6,42
3. In a patient presenting with new or recurrent 
chest pain symptoms, progression of CAD (ie, 
new or worsening stenosis or more extensive 
nonobstructive atherosclerotic plaque) may be 
characterized using CCTA.43,44 Detection of non-
obstructive CAD often results in prompt initiation 
and intensification of preventive and anti-isch-
emic therapies with CCTA.45-50 There is a high 
degree of concordance between CCTA- and 
ICA-determined obstructive CAD.33,51-55 CCTA- 
defined left main stenosis (nonobstructive and 
≥50% stenosis) is associated with a high CAD 
event risk.56,57 Coronary revascularization confers 
a survival benefit among patients with left main 
CAD.58 From randomized trials, major clinical out-
comes in patients with left main CAD are simi-
lar with CABG and PCI at near-term follow-up 
of 1 to 2 years, although repeat revascularization 
rates are higher after PCI.58
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on November 12, 2025

Circulation. 2021;144:e368–e454. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000001029 November 30, 2021 e413
Gulati et al 2021 Chest Pain GuidelineCLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINES4. CCTA has been shown to be accurate for the 
assessment of native vessel CAD and bypass 
graft patency with high accuracy (∼ 96%) and 
concordance (82%–>93%) to ICA; it may also 
be useful to assess patency of proximal large 
stents (≥ 3 mm) if such information is known at 
the time of presentation.9-13 Several controlled 
clinical trials have evaluated the concordance of FFR-CT with invasive FFR.59-62 Diagnostic sensi-
tivity of FFR-CT compared with invasive FFR is 
high.32,60
Stress Testing
5. Observational findings reveal that patients with 
moderate-severe ischemia on PET and SPECT 
MPI have an improved outcome with early coronary 
Figure 13. Clinical Decision Pathway for Patients With Stable Chest Pain (or Equivalent) Symptoms With Prior MI, Prior 
Revascularization, or Known CAD on Invasive Coronary Angiography or CCTA, Including Those With Nonobstructive CAD
Test choice should be guided by local availability and expertise. 
*Known CAD means prior MI, revascularization, known obstructive CAD, nonobstructive CAD. 
†High-risk CAD means left main stenosis ≥50%; or obstructive CAD with FFR-CT ≤0.80. 
‡Test choice guided by the patient’s exercise capacity, resting electrocardiographic abnormalities. 
§Patients with prior CABG or stents >3.0 mm. Follow-up Testing and Intensification of GDMT Guided by Initial Test Results and Persistence / 
Worsening / Frequency of Symptoms and Shared Decision Making. 
CABG indicates coronary artery bypass graft; CAD, coronary artery disease; CCTA, coronary CT angiography; CMR, cardiovascular magnetic 
resonance imaging; CT, computed tomography; ECG, electrocardiogram; FFR-CT, fractional flow reserve with CT; GDMT, guideline-directed 
medical therapy; ICA, invasive coronary angiography; iFR, instant wave-free ratio; INOCA, ischemia and no obstructive coronary artery disease; MI, 
myocardial infarction; MPI, myocardial perfusion imaging; PET, positron emission tomography; SIHD, stable ischemic heart disease; and SPECT, 
single-photon emission CT.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on November 12, 2025

November 30, 2021 Circulation. 2021;144:e368–e454. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000001029 e414
Gulati et al 2021 Chest Pain GuidelineCLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINESrevascularization.20,34,63-65 Patients with moderate-
severe ischemia on PET (≥ 10% ischemic myocar-
dium) treated with PCI reported an improvement in 
angina when compared with those treated medi-
cally.20 Prespecified substudies from therapeutic 
strategy trials for SIHD also evaluated the role of 
rest/stress nuclear MPI to assess residual isch-
emia severity among patients with known CAD 
who were treated with medical therapy alone or 
when combined with revascularization.1,2,14-18 
 Clinical trials of CMR have included subgroups 
with obstructive CAD, including 76% and 49% 
in the MR-IMPACT and MR-IMPACT2 studies, 
respectively, showing generally comparable diag-
nostic accuracy to stress SPECT MPI.23,24 Several 
large, multicenter registries reveal that stress 
CMR effectively risk stratifies patients with known 
CAD.27-30 In a multicenter registry of 2496 patients 
with a history of CAD, an abnormal stress CMR 
had a nearly 2-fold increased mortality hazard.27 
From the SPINS Registry (Stress CMR Perfusion 
Imaging in the United States), patients with known 
CAD with MPI ischemia and scarring by late gado-
linium enhancement had a relative hazard of 1.5 
to 2.1 for CV death or nonfatal MI.30 Prognosis 
worsens for patients by the extent and severity of 
inducible wall motion abnormalities on stress echo-
cardiography.66,67 Recent randomized trial evidence 
supports the role of stress echocardiography to 
guide clinical decision-making. From the ORBITA 
(Objective Randomized Blinded Investigation With 
Optimal Medical Therapy in Stable Angina) trial, 
there was a greater reduction in the stress echo-
cardiographic wall motion score among patients 
with single-vessel CAD treated with PCI compared 
with placebo (P<0.0001).68 In a secondary analy-
sis, there was an interaction between the baseline 
stress echocardiographic wall motion score and 
the efficacy of PCI for improved angina at 6 weeks 
of follow-up.69 That is, PCI-treated patients with a 
wall motion score ≥1 were more often angina-free 
compared with those in the placebo arm.
6. Evidence supports that the improved diagnostic 
accuracy of PET MPI is helpful in the patient with 
known CAD. In a randomized trial of 322 symptom-
atic patients with known CAD, the presence of low- 
and high-risk stress PET findings was associated 
with lower and higher rates of ICA when compared 
with SPECT MPI (P =0.001).37 In this trial, nearly 
1 in 5 patients with low-risk SPECT MPI findings 
underwent ICA, a rate more than twice that of 
stress PET MPI. Based on such evidence, PET is 
preferable over SPECT when both are available.
7 . Observational studies of patients with CAD 
and stable chest pain have demonstrated that exercise treadmill testing can be useful by evalu-
ating the relation of symptoms to graded stress 
testing, thereby helping to confirm the diagnosis 
of angina pectoris; assessing symptom severity; 
and selecting appropriate management: medi-
cal therapy, revascularization, and/or cardiac 
rehabilitation.4,38-40
Secondary Diagnostic Testing: For the 
Assessment of Vascular Territory Flow or Vessel-
Specific Ischemia
8. Measurement of MBFR, when reduced, reflects 
abnormalities of flow within the epicardial coro-
nary arteries and/or microvasculature and inde-
pendently predicts risk of major CAD events. 
This can be effectively accomplished using 
PET31,70,71 or CMR.28 Normal MBFR may be 
helpful in excluding high risk anatomy, although 
reduced levels may provide a better estimate of 
disease extent and severity. In the presence of 
nonobstructive CAD, reduced MBFR may signify 
coronary microvascular dysfunction, especially 
among women.70
5.2.1.1. Patients With Prior CABG Surgery With 
Stable Chest Pain
Recommendations for Patients With Prior CABG Surgery With Stable 
Chest Pain
COR LOE Recommendations
1 C-LD1. In patients who have had prior CABG surgery 
presenting with stable chest pain whose 
noninvasive stress test results show moderate-
to-severe ischemia,1-7 or in those suspected to 
have myocardial ischemia with indeterminate/
nondiagnostic stress test, ICA is recommended 
for guiding therapeutic decision-making.1
2a C-LD2. In patients who have had prior CABG surgery 
presenting with stable chest pain who are 
suspected to have myocardial ischemia, it is 
reasonable to perform stress imaging or CCTA 
to evaluate for myocardial ischemia or graft 
stenosis or occlusion.8-15
Synopsis
In patients with prior CABG who have stable chest pain, it 
is important to assess medical therapies and optimize all 
guideline-directed therapies.1 ICA can be useful to guide 
therapeutic decision-making in those with frequent angi-
na that has not improved with medical therapy.1-9 In those 
whose symptoms do improve after optimizing medical 
therapy, evaluation with stress testing can be useful to 
assess the degree of myocardial ischemia and determine 
which patients may benefit from coronary angiography.6,10 
CCTA can also be used to detect graft patency but is of-
ten less robust for assessing native coronary vessel ste-
nosis in those with prior CABG, because of high degree 
of nondiagnostic segments.8-15
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on November 12, 2025

Circulation. 2021;144:e368–e454. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000001029 November 30, 2021 e415
Gulati et al 2021 Chest Pain GuidelineCLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINESRecommendation-Specific Supportive Text
1. There are stress test features in patients with prior 
CABG and presenting with stable chest pain that 
may indicate a high likelihood of severe ischemic 
heart disease such as stress electrocardiographic 
findings including 2 mm of ST-segment depres-
sion at low workload or persisting into recovery, 
exercise-induced ST-segment elevation, or exer-
cise-induced VT/VF, severe stress-induced left 
ventricular systolic dysfunction, stress-induced 
perfusion abnormalities involving ≥10% myocar-
dium or stress-induced left ventricular dilation. 
In these patients with prior CABG and high-risk 
imaging features, referral for ICA is reasonable 
provided that these patients are amenable to and 
are candidates for coronary revascularization.1-7 
Patients with prior CABG presenting with stable 
chest pain may have stress imaging features that 
are equivocal or nondiagnostic for the presence of 
myocardial ischemia. Equivocal or nondiagnostic 
stress tests may be a result of patient’s body habi-
tus, inadequate or suboptimal heart rate, arrhyth-
mias such as atrial fibrillation, left bundle branch 
block, or patient motion. In these patients, perform-
ing an ICA is reasonable when the angiographic 
findings have a high likelihood of impacting thera-
peutic decisions.1
2. Stable chest pain due to myocardial ischemia may 
occur in patients with prior CABG because of pro-
gression of atherosclerosis in the native coronary 
arteries or within the bypass grafts. Noninvasive 
stress imaging testing is reasonable in these 
patients to identify ischemic myocardial territo-
ries that will further guide revascularization for 
patients who are amenable to and are candidates 
for revascularization. Furthermore, stress imaging 
also assists in stratifying patients to determine 
the degree of likelihood for severe ischemic heart 
disease, which will assist in therapeutic deci-
sions.8-10,12-14 CCTA has a great degree of accu-
racy with a sensitivity and specificity of detecting 
complete graft occlusions, 99% and 99%, 
respectively, when compared with the standard 
of ICA.15 Furthermore, CCTA was ideal in assess-
ing bypass grafts attributable to the large size of 
these vessels, decreased vessel calcification and 
decreased motion of these vessels when com-
pared with native coronary vessels, with success-
ful evaluation of bypass grafts in 93% to 100% of 
patients.15 In patients who have stable chest pain 
and are previously known to have borderline graft 
stenosis or are suspected to have new graft ste-
nosis, CCTA is useful for assessing graft patency 
but less robust for assessing native coronary vessel stenosis in this population because of high 
degree of nondiagnostic segments.8-15
5.2.2. Patients With Known Nonobstructive CAD 
Presenting With Stable Chest Pain
Recommendations for Patients With Known Nonobstructive CAD 
Presenting With Stable Chest Pain
Referenced studies that support the recommendations are 
summarized in Online Data Supplements 34 and 35.
COR LOE Recommendations
Index Diagnostic Testing
Anatomic Testing
2a B-NR1. For symptomatic patients with known 
nonobstructive CAD who have stable chest 
pain, CCTA is reasonable for determining 
atherosclerotic plaque burden and progression 
to obstructive CAD, and guiding therapeutic 
decision-making.1-7
2a B-NR2. For patients with known coronary stenosis from 
40% to 90% on CCTA, FFR can be useful for 
diagnosis of vessel-specific ischemia and to 
guide decision-making regarding the use of 
ICA.8-14
Stress Testing
2a C-LD3. For patients with known extensive 
nonobstructive CAD with stable chest pain 
symptoms, stress imaging (PET/SPECT, 
CMR, or echocardiography) is reasonable for 
the diagnosis of myocardial ischemia.15-24
Synopsis
For patients with known nonobstructive CAD (luminal 
narrowing 1%–49%), CCTA can be useful for detection 
of new or worsening obstructive stenosis, atheroscle-
rotic disease progression, and identification of high-risk 
plaque features, such as low attenuation plaque or posi-
tive remodeling1,2,5-7 ,25 (Figure 13). Similarly, stress imag-
ing is reasonable to detect myocardial ischemia and can 
help guide further management and treatment of isch-
emic burden.15-24
Irrespective of the test performed, an overarching goal 
of the evaluation of symptomatic patients with known 
nonobstructive CAD is to identify those who would ben-
efit from intensification of preventive therapy, as defined 
by the 2018 cholesterol-lowering guidelines and the 
2019 prevention guidelines.26-29 For this evaluation, the 
patient should be engaged in a process of shared deci-
sion-making before determining the final choice of the 
cardiac testing modality and in guiding the pathway for 
treatment decisions.
Recommendation-Specific Supportive Text
Anatomic Testing
1. Atherosclerosis is a progressive disease that 
worsens over time,1 with nonobstructive CAD 
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on November 12, 2025

November 30, 2021 Circulation. 2021;144:e368–e454. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000001029 e416
Gulati et al 2021 Chest Pain GuidelineCLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINESconsistently identified as precursor for ACS.3-6 
From the PROMISE trial, nonobstructive CAD was 
associated with a 3-fold increase in MACE risk 
over ∼2 years of follow-up.3 Additional analyses 
from the SCOT-HEART and PROMISE trials reveal 
that high-risk atherosclerotic plaque features are 
associated with an elevated MACE risk among 
patients with nonobstructive CAD.4,5 CCTA com-
monly identifies patients with nonobstructive CAD 
but can further define compositional alterations 
within the plaque (ie, noncalcified plaque) and pos-
itive remodeling.4,5,7 ,25,30 These plaque features have 
been associated with inducible ischemia, identified 
as precursors for ACS, and independently predict 
MACE.5,6,31 Recently, Williams et al reported that a 
low attenuation plaque burden was associated with 
a >6-fold increase in incident MI for patients with 
nonobstructive CAD.4
2. Controlled clinical trials reveal that FFR-CT improves 
diagnostic accuracy over and above obstruc-
tive CAD on CCTA when compared with invasive 
FFR.12,13 Multinational registries have examined the 
use of FFR-CT with regards to the use to drive clini-
cal decision-making regarding the use of follow-up 
ICA and the safety of deferring coronary revascular-
ization in patients with a negative FFR-CT.8-11 From 
the ADVANCE (Assessing Diagnostic Value of Non-
invasive FFR-CT in Coronary Care) registry, FFR-CT 
changed treatment recommendations in two-thirds 
of patients, and there were no MACE at 90 days 
for patients with a negative FFR-CT.10 From the 
SYNTAX 3 trial,14 FFR-CT was performed in 223 
patients. Treatment recommendations and selec-
tion of vessels for revascularization were guided by 
FFR-CT in ∼ 20% of patients.
Stress Testing
3. Approximately 20% to 30% of patients with non-
obstructive CAD will demonstrate ischemia.15-24 
Patients who experience ischemia with non-
obstructive CAD (INOCA – see Section 5.2.3) 
benefit from assessment of functional significance 
of an intermediate coronary stenosis as it provides 
insight into the patient’s presenting symptoms and 
can help guide clinical management.
5.2.3. Patients With Suspected Ischemia and No 
Obstructive CAD (INOCA)
Recommendations for myocardial blood flow measure-
ments using PET, echocardiography, and CMR are found 
in Section 5.2.2.Recommendations for Patients With INOCA
Referenced studies that support the recommendations are 
summarized in Online Data Supplements 36 and 37 .
COR LOE Recommendations
2a B-NR1. For patients with persistent stable chest 
pain and nonobstructive CAD and at least 
mild myocardial ischemia on imaging, it is 
reasonable to consider invasive coronary 
function testing to improve the diagnosis of 
coronary microvascular dysfunction and to 
enhance risk stratification.1-4
2a B-NR2. For patients with persistent stable chest pain 
and nonobstructive CAD, stress PET MPI with 
MBFR is reasonable to diagnose microvascular 
dysfunction and enhance risk stratification.5-11
2a B-NR3. For patients with persistent stable chest 
pain and nonobstructive CAD, stress CMR 
with the addition of MBFR measurement is 
reasonable to improve diagnosis of coronary 
myocardial dysfunction and for estimating risk 
of MACE.12-14
2b C-EO4. For patients with persistent stable chest 
pain and nonobstructive CAD, stress 
echocardiography with the addition of coronary 
flow velocity reserve measurement may be 
reasonable to improve diagnosis of coronary 
myocardial dysfunction and for estimating risk 
of MACE.
Synopsis
Signs and symptoms of ischemia occur because of focal 
obstructive CAD, but INOCA is common and may result 
from alterations in flow within the microvasculature. Thus, 
many symptomatic patients without obstructive CAD on 
previous workup may be candidates for assessment of 
coronary microvascular dysfunction and other causes 
of INOCA.1 Patients at highest risk for coronary micro-
vascular dysfunction include women, those with hyper-
tension, diabetes, and other insulin-resistant states.15 
There is substantive evidence that testing focusing on 
documentation of coronary or microvascular flow abnor-
malities can aid in the diagnosis of microvascular an-
gina, and abundant evidence supports that the addition 
of flow alterations improves risk stratification. Invasive 
coronary reactivity testing allows for the assessment of 
vasospasm, in addition to nonendothelial–dependent and 
endothelium-dependent microvascular reactivity.2,4 From 
the National Institutes of Health-NHLBI-sponsored 
WISE (Women’s Ischemia Syndrome Evaluation), im-
paired coronary flow reserve (ie, <2.32) among women 
with no obstructive CAD was associated with an elevated 
hazard for major CAD events with lengthy follow-up of 
10 years (P=0.03).2 Among women with no obstructive 
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on November 12, 2025

Circulation. 2021;144:e368–e454. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000001029 November 30, 2021 e417
Gulati et al 2021 Chest Pain GuidelineCLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINESCAD, epicardial vasoconstriction was also significantly 
associated with higher rates of hospitalization for angina 
(P=0.0002).2 Prognostic evidence is available support-
ing the novel contribution of PET MBFR techniques; sev-
eral reports also note a benefit using CMR and echocar-
diographic techniques. A proposed diagnostic evaluation 
pathway is outlined in Figure 14.
Recommendation-Specific Supportive Text
1. Evidence supports a role for invasive coronary 
reactivity testing, including prognostic evidence 
from the WISE study.1,2 The CorMicA (Coronary 
Microvascular Angina) trial enrolled symptomatic patients (74% women) without obstructive CAD 
and positive invasive coronary reactivity test-
ing (n=76 patients to intervention and 75 to the 
blinded control group). The intervention consisted 
of anti-ischemic therapy using beta-blockers and 
angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors along 
with preventive care (statins) and lifestyle changes, 
including smoking cessation, and was associated 
with a significant improvement in angina and qual-
ity of life over 6 months (P=0.001).4,16 This small 
trial did not report any differences in 6-month 
MACE (P=0.8).
2. PET measurement of peak myocardial blood flow 
and MBFR, when reduced, reflects abnormalities 
Figure 14. Clinical Decision Pathway for INOCA
Test choice should be guided by local availability and expertise. 
*Ford T et al.16 †Cannot exclude microvascular vasospasm. 
ACh indicates acetylcholine; CAD, coronary artery disease; CFR, coronary flow reserve; CFVR, coronary flow velocity reserve; CMD, coronary 
microvascular dysfunction; CV, cardiovascular; FFR, fractional flow reserve; GDMT, guideline-directed medical therapy; IMR, index of microcirculatory 
restriction; INOCA, ischemia and no obstructive CAD; MACE, major adverse cardiovascular events; and MBFR, myocardial blood flow reserve.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on November 12, 2025

November 30, 2021 Circulation. 2021;144:e368–e454. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000001029 e418
Gulati et al 2021 Chest Pain GuidelineCLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINESof flow within the epicardial coronary arteries 
and microvasculature and independently predicts 
risk of major CAD events.5-7 ,17 PET measurement 
of MBFR improves risk stratification, including 
for patients with nonobstructive CAD, especially 
women, for whom coronary microvascular dysfunc-
tion is suspected.18
3. CMR has been used to evaluate MBFR. When 
validated against invasive coronary physiology 
measures, pixel-wise quantitative myocardial 
perfusion mapping by CMR was able to identify 
coronary microvascular dysfunction in a small 
study that included 23 patients with nonobstruc-
tive CAD.19 The addition of coronary flow reserve 
improves prognostication.12-14 Stress CMR stud-
ies of MBFR have shown reasonable agreement 
with PET (n=21).20
4. Stress echocardiography assessing coronary flow 
velocity reserve in the left anterior descending 
artery with Doppler can currently be combined 
with wall motion analysis during vasodilator stress 
echocardiography. Limited data have shown that 
abnormal coronary flow velocity reserve (≤2) adds 
incremental value to the prognostic stratification 
achieved with clinical and angiographic data for 
events such as death and nonfatal MI in patients 
with angiographically normal or near-normal coro-
nary arteries and preserved at-rest regional and 
global left ventricular function at baseline and dur-
ing stress.21
5.3. Cost-Value Considerations in Diagnostic 
Testing
A general concept regarding cost is that layered testing 
(ie, when a test is followed by more tests) leads to higher 
costs. To minimize the potential needs for downstream 
testing, clinicians should select the test that is most likely 
to answer a particular question.
5.3.1. CCTA and CAC Scanning Cost-Value 
Considerations
In the outpatient setting, long-term costs were gener-
ally similar between CCTA and stress testing strate-
gies.1 Higher invasive angiography rates after CCTA are 
matched by a greater use of downstream stress testing 
after initial stress testing, resulting in minimal differ-
ences in cost at 2 to 3 years of follow-up.1,2 From the  
CONSERVE (Coronary Computed Tomographic Angi-
ography for Selective Cardiac Catheterization) trial, 823 
patients were randomized to a selective versus direct re-
ferral strategy to ICA. Enrollment was limited to patients 
with nonemergent indications for ICA.3 The selective re-ferral arm included CCTA-guided use of ICA. Cumulative 
diagnostic costs were $1183 for the selective arm and 
$2755 for the direct referral arm of the CONSERVE trial 
(57% lower costs). In the CCTA-guided arm, follow-up 
stress testing was applied and contributed to reduced 
referrals to ICA.
A recent tiered testing strategy was evaluated 
in both the CRESCENT I and II trials.2,4 From the  
CRESCENT I trial, CAC was used as the index test, with 
follow-up CCTA used only in patients with detectable 
CAC or for those with a high pretest risk.2 In this trial, 
nearly 40% of patients did not undergo CCTA, which 
reduced diagnostic evaluation costs; no events were 
reported in this subgroup. By comparison, nearly half of 
those randomized to the exercise ECG had additional 
confirmatory diagnostic testing. Overall, 1-year costs 
were significantly lower in the CAC tiered testing pro-
tocol (16% cost savings; P<0.0001).2 Moreover, 1-year 
MACE-free survival was higher in the CAC-guided 
testing arm (97%) compared with exercise ECG (90%; 
HR: 0.32; P=0.011).
5.3.2. Exercise Electrocardiographic Cost-Value 
Considerations
The economic evidence for the exercise ECG supports 
that tiered testing may offset its reduced diagnostic ac-
curacy.1,2 In a decision model, tiered testing of exercise 
ECG followed by selective stress echocardiography re-
sulted in improved diagnostic accuracy and favorable 
cost-effective ratios when compared with other testing 
strategies.2 In a Medicare cohort, observed 180-day 
costs were lowest for the exercise ECG when compared 
with stress echocardiography, MPI, or CCTA.3 Ran-
domized trial data on cost are available and from the 
PROMISE trial initial test costs were $174 for exercise 
ECG, >50% lower than that of other imaging proce-
dures.4 At 3-years of follow-up, the mean cost difference 
was $1731 higher for CCTA (n=4818) when compared 
with the exercise ECG (n=858); however, the 95% 
CIs for cost differences was wide ($2 to $3519), and 
there was no overall difference by randomization.4 Over-
all, results from the PROMISE trial showed that stress 
testing was associated with similar costs and CAD out-
comes over ∼ 3 years of follow-up.4,5 In a randomized 
trial of 824 symptomatic women, cumulative procedural 
costs were nearly 50% lower for exercise ECG versus  
MPI SPECT (P<0.0001), with no difference in 2-year 
event-free survival (P=0.59).6
5.3.3. Stress Echocardiographic Cost-Value 
Considerations
Several cost-effectiveness models have reported an in-
creased incremental cost-effectiveness ratio for stress 
echocardiography, compared with exercise ECG and 
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on November 12, 2025

Circulation. 2021;144:e368–e454. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000001029 November 30, 2021 e419
Gulati et al 2021 Chest Pain GuidelineCLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINESother diagnostic procedures.1-4 In these models, cost-
effectiveness was influenced by an improved diagnos-
tic accuracy for stress echocardiography, which led to 
longer life expectancy.1 In a recent systematic review, 
the evidence supports that stress echocardiography 
or stress MPI are cost-effective for those patients at 
intermediate pretest risk.5 The improved CAD detec-
tion for exercise echocardiography resulted in fewer 
office and ED visits and hospital days, yielding a 20% 
cost savings when compared with the exercise ECG.6 
There were 2204 patients that underwent stress echo-
cardiography in the PROMISE trial, and 3-year mean 
costs were similar to that of CCTA (CCTA – stress 
echocardiography mean cost difference: –$363; 95% 
CI: –$1562 to $818).7
5.3.4. Stress Nuclear MPI Cost-Value 
Considerations
Among intermediate-risk patients, evidence synthesis 
supports that stress MPI is a cost-effective test op-
tion.1 From the SPARC (Study of Myocardial Perfusion 
and Coronary Anatomy Imaging Roles in Coronary Ar-
tery Disease) registry, observed 2-year mortality rate 
was highest for PET MPI (5.5%) compared with CCTA 
(0.7%) or SPECT MPI (1.6%), with 2-year cost high-
est for patients undergoing PET.2 In the PROMISE trial, 
nearly two-thirds of patients underwent stress MPI, and 
the mean cost was similar when compared with CCTA.3 
Mean costs were also similar in a randomized trial of 
457 patients comparing stress MPI with exercise ECG 
(P>0.05).4 Among higher-likelihood patients in the UK 
enrolled in the CECaT (Cost Effectiveness of Nonin-
vasive Cardiac Testing) trial, MPI SPECT was the most 
cost-effective approach.5
5.3.5. Stress CMR Cost-Value Considerations
A synthesis of this cost evidence reveals a pattern 
whereby CMR perfusion and scar imaging is associat-
ed with a favorable incremental cost-effectiveness ra-
tio of <$50 000 per quality-adjusted life years saved.1,2 
From a single report, a CMR strategy informed by the  
CE-MARC trial was more cost-effective than stress 
MPI, largely because of the higher diagnostic accuracy 
for CMR.2 However, the most cost-effective strategy 
was that of initial exercise ECG followed by selective 
stress CMR and invasive angiography; for this tiered 
testing approach, additional testing was deemed ap-
propriate in the setting of abnormal or inconclusive 
findings. In a decision model for intermediate pretest 
risk patients, a strategy of CMR followed by selec-
tive ICA had projected reduced costs by ∼ 25% when 
compared with direct referral to ICA.2,3 From the Stress 
CMR Perfusion Imaging in the United States registry,4 
patients with negative findings for ischemia and scar 
had low downstream costs.56. EVIDENCE GAPS AND FUTURE 
RESEARCH
Chest pain is one of the most common symptoms for 
which a person seeks medical care, and it should there-
fore be the target of substantial research investigation.
1. For patients with ACS, considerable success has 
been achieved in reducing door-to-balloon times 
for STEMI, but little progress has been made in 
reducing the important delays from symptom onset 
to presentation. Further research is needed to 
develop approaches to shorten this interval includ-
ing studies of other methods of evaluating patients 
with chest pain using technologies that permit 
acquisition and transmission of ECGs from home 
and remote evaluations (eg, telehealth) for those 
with acute symptoms.1,2
2. An important, increasing patient population 
includes women and men with angina and ACS 
associated with angiographically normal or non-
obstructive coronary arteries.3,4 Prognosis is not 
benign, pathophysiology has not been clarified, 
and optimal therapy is unclear in these hetero-
geneous groups, which are now considered in 
terms of INOCA5 and MINOCA.6 Adequately 
identifying patients with INOCA, and completing 
an evaluation to make such a diagnosis, is nec-
essary but often not done, regardless of whether 
chest pain is assessed in the ED, inpatient, or 
outpatient setting. Further investigation to clarify 
disease mechanisms in these challenging syn-
dromes is needed to provide the basis for thera-
peutic advances.
3. One of the initial challenges in the evaluation 
of patients with chest pain, either in the emer-
gency or office setting, is symptom classification. 
Methods to elicit symptoms and clusters of symp-
toms that provide improved pretest probabilities 
of symptomatic CAD may be aided with machine-
learning algorithms. It is already clear that some 
common dogma about chest pain descriptions, 
such as differences between men and women, 
may not be as prevalent as has been reported7 
and may impede care of both sexes if they do 
not fit preconceived notions of the clinical sig-
nificance of their symptoms. However, reducing 
the differences in both sex and racial differences 
in treatment and outcomes are important future 
goals of research and clinical care.
4. Clinical risk stratification and decision tools will 
likely continue to grow in popularity because they 
are incorporated into electronic health records, 
but it would be useful to test them in large 
randomized trials to rigorously determine their 
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on November 12, 2025

November 30, 2021 Circulation. 2021;144:e368–e454. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000001029 e420
Gulati et al 2021 Chest Pain GuidelineCLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINESbenefit in terms of improved outcomes or lower 
costs before widespread implementation.1 hs-
cTn assays are now the global standard of care 
for identifying myocardial injury, although ques-
tions remain about whether minimal elevations, 
which carry prognostic value, are actionable in 
a manner that improves outcomes. Trials evalu-
ating various medical and procedural strategies 
would be useful including diagnostic and thera-
peutic algorithms for MINOCA. The number of 
potential questions that could be addressed will 
demand innovative trial designs to use resources 
efficiently and meaningfully.
5. Increasingly, randomized trials will be performed 
to determine which diagnostic tests can be 
eliminated from initial and follow-up care, both 
to streamline management algorithms and to 
decrease health care costs. In part, this approach 
will encompass evaluation of where patients with 
chest pain should be initially evaluated and moni-
tored. Comparison of the various imaging modali-
ties in randomized trials should help refine test 
selection and use.8
Thus, the diagnosis and management of chest 
pain will remain a fertile area of investigation, with 
randomized evaluations complementing insights 
provided by registries of patients presenting with 
chest pain.9-12 In the future, registries will more fre-
quently serve as platforms within which to conduct 
randomized trials. Accreditation activities coupled 
with registry participation will also need to be eval-
uated to determine if they not only improve pro-
cesses of care but also affect clinical endpoints.12 
Assessment of long-term outcomes, patient-
centered metrics, and cost will be integrated into 
these studies to enhance the evidence base for 
care of patients presenting with chest pain with 
greater precision.
ACC/AHA JOINT COMMITTEE MEMBERS
Patrick T. O’Gara, MD, MACC, FAHA, Chair; Joshua A. 
Beckman, MD, MS, FAHA, FACC, Chair-Elect; Glenn 
N. Levine, MD, FACC, FAHA, Immediate Past Chair*; 
Sana M. Al-Khatib, MD, MHS, FACC, FAHA*; Anastasia 
L. Armbruster, PharmD, FACC; Kim K. Birtcher, MS, 
PharmD, AACC*; Ralph G. Brindis, MD, MPH, MACC*; 
Joaquin E. Cigarroa, MD, FACC*; Lisa de las Fuentes, MD, MS, FASE, FAHA; Anita Deswal, MD, MPH, FACC, 
FAHA; Dave L. Dixon, PharmD, FACC*; Lee A. Fleisher, 
MD, FACC, FAHA*; Federico Gentile, MD, FACC*; 
Zachary D. Goldberger, MD, MS, FACC, FAHA*; Bu-
lent Gorenek, MD, FACC; Norrisa Haynes, MD; Adrian 
F. Hernandez, MD; Mark A. Hlatky, MD, FACC, FAHA*; 
John S. Ikonomidis, MD, PhD, FAHA*; José A. Joglar, MD, 
FAHA, FACC; W. Schuyler Jones, MD, FACC; Joseph E. 
Marine, MD, FACC*; Daniel B. Mark, MD, MPH, FACC; 
Debabrata Mukherjee, MD, MS, FACC, FAHA; Latha P. 
Palaniappan, MD, MS, FAHA, FACC; Mariann R. Pia-
no, RN, PhD, FAHA; Tanveer Rab, MD, FACC; Barbara 
Riegel, PhD, RN, FAHA*; Erica S. Spatz, MD, MHS, FACC; 
Jacqueline E. Tamis-Holland, MD, FACC; Duminda N. Wi-
jeysundera, MD, PhD*; Y. Joseph Woo, MD, FAHA, FACC
STAFF
American College of Cardiology
Dipti N. Itchhaporia, MD, FACC, President
Cathleen C. Gates, Chief Executive Officer
MaryAnne Elma, MPH, Senior Director, Enterprise Con-
tent and Digital Strategy
Timothy W. Schutt, MA, Clinical Practice Guidelines Analyst
Grace D. Ronan, Team Leader, Clinical Policy Publications
American College of Cardiology/American 
Heart Association
Thomas S.D. Getchius, Director, Guideline Strategy and 
Operations
Abdul R. Abdullah, MD, Director, Guideline Science and 
Methodology
Hannah Planalp, Guideline Advisor
Zainab Shipchandler, MPH, Guideline Advisor
American Heart Association
Mitchell S.V. Elkind, MD, MS, FAAN, FAHA, President
Nancy Brown, Chief Executive Officer
Mariell Jessup, MD, FAHA, Chief Science and Medical 
Officer
Radhika Rajgopal Singh, PhD, Senior Vice President, Of-
fice of Science and Health
Paul St. Laurent, DNP, RN, Senior Science and Medicine 
Advisor, Office of Science, Medicine and Health
Jody Hundley, Production and Operations Manager, Sci-
entific Publications, Office of Science Operations
*Former ACC/AHA Joint Committee member; current member during the writing effort.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on November 12, 2025

Circulation. 2021;144:e368–e454. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000001029 November 30, 2021 e421
Gulati et al 2021 Chest Pain GuidelineCLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINESARTICLE INFORMATION
This document was approved by the American College of Cardiology Clinical Pol-
icy Approval Committee in May 2021, the American Heart Association Science 
Advisory and Coordinating Committee in May 2021, the Society of Cardiovascu-
lar Computed Tomography in July 2021, the Society for Academic Emergency 
Medicine in June 2021, the Society for Cardiovascular Magnetic Resonance in 
June 2021, the American College of Chest Physicians in June 2021, the Ameri-
can Society of Echocardiography in June 2021, the American Heart Association 
Executive Committee in July 2021, and the American College of Cardiology Sci-
ence and Quality Committee in July 2021.
The Comprehensive RWI Data Supplement table is available with this article 
at https://www.ahajournals.org/doi/suppl/10.1161/CIR.0000000000001029.
This article has been copublished in the Journal of the American College of 
Cardiology.
Copies: This document is available on the websites of the American Heart 
Association (professional.heart.org) and the American College of Cardiology 
(www.acc.org). A copy of the document is also available at https://professional.
heart.org/statements by selecting the “Guidelines & Statements” button. To pur-
chase additional reprints, call 215-356-2721 or email Meredith.Edelman@wolt-
erskluwer.com.
The expert peer review of AHA-commissioned documents (eg, scientific 
statements, clinical practice guidelines, systematic reviews) is conducted by the 
AHA Office of Science Operations. For more on AHA statements and guidelines 
development, visit https://professional.heart.org/statements. Select the “Guide-
lines & Statements” drop-down menu near the top of the webpage, then click 
“Publication Development.”
Permissions: Multiple copies, modification, alteration, enhancement, and/or 
distribution of this document are not permitted without the express permission of 
the American Heart Association. Instructions for obtaining permission are located 
at https://www.heart.org/permissions. A link to the “Copyright Permissions Re-
quest Form” appears in the second paragraph (https://www.heart.org/en/about-
us/statements-and-policies/copyright-request-form).
 REFERENCES
PREAMBLE
 1. Intitute of Medicine (US) Committee on Standards for Developing Trustwor-
thy Clinical Practice Guidelines. Clinical Practice Guidelines We Can Trust. 
Washington, DC: National Academies Press. 2011.
 2. Institute of Medicine (US) Committee on Standards for Systematic Reviews 
of Comparative Effectiveness Research. Finding What Works in Health 
Care: Standards for Systematic Reviews. Washington, DC: National Acad-
emies Press. 2011.
 3. Anderson JL, Heidenreich PA, Barnett PG, et al. ACC/AHA statement on 
cost/value methodology in clinical practice guidelines and performance 
measures: a report of the American College of Cardiology/American Heart 
Association Task Force on Performance Measures and Task Force on Prac-
tice Guidelines. Circulation. 2014;129:2329–2345.
 4. ACCF/AHA Task Force on Practice Guidelines. Methodology manual and 
policies from the ACCF/AHA Task Force on Practice Guidelines. Ameri-
can College of Cardiology and American Heart Association. 2010. Available 
at: https://www.acc.org/Guidelines/About-Guidelines-and-Clinical-Docu-
ments/Methodology. Accessed July 26, 2021. https://professional.heart.
org/-/media/phd-files/guidelines-and-statements/methodology_manual_
and_policies_ucm_319826.pdf.
 5. Halperin JL, Levine GN, Al-Khatib SM, et al. Further evolution of the ACC/
AHA clinical practice guideline recommendation classification system: a re-
port of the American College of Cardiology/American Heart Association Task 
Force on Clinical Practice Guidelines. Circulation. 2016;133:1426–1428.
 6. Arnett DK, Goodman RA, Halperin JL, et al. AHA/ACC/HHS strategies to 
enhance application of clinical practice guidelines in patients with cardio-
vascular disease and comorbid conditions: from the American Heart Asso-
ciation, American College of Cardiology, and US Department of Health and 
Human Services. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2014;64:1851–1856.
 7 . Levine GN, O'Gara PT, Beckman JA, et al. Recent innovations, modifica-
tions, and evolution of ACC/AHA Clinical Practice Guidelines: an update for 
our constituencies: a report of the American College of Cardiology/Ameri-
can Heart Association Task Force on Clinical Practice Guidelines. Circula-
tion. 2019;129:e879–e886.1.4. Scope of the Guideline
 1. Fihn SD, Blankenship JC, Alexander KP, et al. 2014 ACC/AHA/AATS/
PCNA/SCAI/STS focused update of the guideline for the diagnosis and 
management of patients with stable ischemic heart disease: a report of the 
American College of Cardiology/American Heart Association Task Force 
on Practice Guidelines, and the American Association for Thoracic Surgery, 
Preventive Cardiovascular Nurses Association, Society for Cardiovascular 
Angiography and Interventions, and Society of Thoracic Surgeons. Circula-
tion. 2014;130:1749–1767 .
 2. Fihn SD, Gardin JM, Abrams J, et al. 2012 ACCF/AHA/ACP/AATS/
PCNA/SCAI/STS guideline for the diagnosis and management of patients 
with stable ischemic heart disease: a report of the American College of 
Cardiology Foundation/American Heart Association Task Force on Practice 
Guidelines, and the American College of Physicians, American Association 
for Thoracic Surgery, Preventive Cardiovascular Nurses Association, Society 
for Cardiovascular Angiography and Interventions, and Society of Thoracic 
Surgeons. Circulation. 2012;126:e354–e471.
 3. January CT, Wann LS, Alpert JS, et al. 2014 AHA/ACC/HRS guide-
line for the management of patients with atrial fibrillation: a report of 
the American College of Cardiology/American Heart Association Task 
Force on practice guidelines and the Heart Rhythm Society. Circulation. 
2014;130:e199–e267 .
 4. January CT, Wann LS, Calkins H, et al. 2019 AHA/ACC/HRS focused up-
date of the 2014 AHA/ACC/HRS guideline for the management of pa-
tients with atrial fibrillation: a report of the American College of Cardiology/
American Heart Association Task Force on Clinical Practice Guidelines and 
the Heart Rhythm Society. Circulation. 2019;140:e125–e151.
 5. Amsterdam EA, Wenger NK, Brindis RG, et al. 2014 AHA/ACC guideline 
for the management of patients with non-ST-elevation acute coronary 
syndromes: a report of the American College of Cardiology/Ameri-
can Heart Association Task Force on Practice Guidelines. Circulation. 
2014;130:e344–e426.
 6. Grundy SM, Stone NJ, Bailey AL, et al. 2018 AHA/ACC/AACVPR/AAPA/
ABC/ACPM/ADA/AGS/APhA/ ASPC/NLA/PCNA guideline on the man-
agement of blood cholesterol: a report of the American College of Cardiol-
ogy/American Heart Association Task Force on Clinical Practice Guidelines. 
Circulation. 2019;139:e1082–e1143.
 7 . Yancy CW, Jessup M, Bozkurt B, et al. 2013 ACCF/AHA guideline for the 
management of heart failure: a report of the American College of Cardiol-
ogy Foundation/American Heart Association Task Force on practice guide-
lines. Circulation. 2013;128:e240–e327 .
 8. Yancy CW, Jessup M, Bozkurt B, et al. 2017 ACC/AHA/HFSA focused 
update of the 2013 ACCF/AHA guideline for the management of heart 
failure: a report of the American College of Cardiology/American Heart As-
sociation Task Force on Clinical Practice Guidelines and the Heart Failure 
Society of America. Circulation. 2017;136:e137–e161.
 9. Arnett DK, Blumenthal R, Albert M, et al. 2019 ACC/AHA guideline on 
the primary prevention of cardiovascular disease: a report of the American 
College of Cardiology/American Heart Association Task Force on Clinical 
Practice Guidelines. Circulation. 2019;140:e596–e646.
 10. Jensen MD, Ryan DH, Apovian CM, et al. 2013 AHA/ACC/TOS guideline for the 
management of overweight and obesity in adults: a report of the American Col-
lege of Cardiology/American Heart Association Task Force on Practice Guide-
lines and The Obesity Society. Circulation. 2014;129(suppl 2):S102–S138.
 11. O'Gara PT, Kushner FG, Ascheim DD, et al. 2013 ACCF/AHA guideline 
for the management of ST-elevation myocardial infarction: a report of the 
American College of Cardiology Foundation/American Heart Association 
Task Force on Practice Guidelines. Circulation. 2013;127:e362–e425.
 12. Al-Khatib SM, Stevenson WG, Ackerman MJ, et al. 2017 AHA/ACC/
HRS guideline for management of patients with ventricular arrhythmias 
and the prevention of sudden cardiac death: a report of the Ameri-
can College of Cardiology/American Heart Association Task Force on 
Clinical Practice Guidelines and the Heart Rhythm Society. Circulation. 
2018;138:e272–e391.
 13. Hillis LD, Smith PK, Anderson JL, et al. 2011 ACCF/ AHA guideline for 
coronary artery bypass graft surgery: a report of the American College of 
Cardiology Foundation/American Heart Association Task Force on Practice 
Guidelines. Circulation. 2011;124:e652–e735.
 14. Ommen SR, Mital S, Burke MA, et al. 2020 AHA/ACC guideline for the diag-
nosis and treatment of patients with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy: a report of 
the American College of Cardiology/American Heart Association Joint Com-
mittee on Clinical Practice Guidelines. Circulation. 2020;142:e558–e631.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on November 12, 2025

November 30, 2021 Circulation. 2021;144:e368–e454. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000001029 e422
Gulati et al 2021 Chest Pain GuidelineCLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINES 15. Levine GN, Bates ER, Blankenship JC, et al. 2011 ACCF/AHA/SCAI 
guideline for percutaneous coronary intervention: a report of the American 
College of Cardiology Foundation/American Heart Association Task Force 
on Practice Guidelines and the Society for Cardiovascular Angiography and 
Interventions. Circulation. 2011;124:e574–e651.
 16. Levine GN, Bates ER, Blankenship JC, et al. 2015 ACC/AHA/SCAI fo-
cused update on primary percutaneous coronary intervention for patients 
with ST-elevation myocardial infarction: an update of the 2011 ACCF/
AHA/SCAI guideline for percutaneous coronary intervention and the 2013 
ACCF/AHA guideline for the management of ST-elevation myocardial in-
farction. Circulation. 2016;133:1135–1147 .
 17 . Smith SC Jr, Benjamin EJ, Bonow RO, et al. AHA/ACCF secondary preven-
tion and risk reduction therapy for patients with coronary and other ath-
erosclerotic vascular disease: 2011 update: a guideline from the American 
Heart Association and American College of Cardiology Foundation. Circula-
tion. 2011;58:2458–2473.
 18. Berg KM, Cheng A, Panchal AR, et al. Part 7: systems of care: 2020 Ameri-
can Heart Association guidelines for cardiopulmonary resuscitation and 
emergency cardiovascular care. Circulation. 2020;142:S580–S604.
 19. Panchal AR, Berg KM, Hirsch KG, et al. 2019 American Heart Association 
focused update on advanced cardiovascular life support: use of advanced 
airways, vasopressors, and extracorporeal cardiopulmonary resuscitation 
during cardiac arrest: an update to the American Heart Association Guide-
lines for Cardiopulmonary Resuscitation and Emergency Cardiovascular 
Care. Circulation. 2019;140:e881–e894.
 20. Whelton PK, Carey RM, Aronow WS, et al. 2017 ACC/AHA/AAPA/ABC/
ACPM/AGS/APhA/ASH/ ASPC/NMA/PCNA Guideline for the preven-
tion, detection, evaluation, and management of high blood pressure in 
adults: a report of the American College of Cardiology/American Heart 
Association Task Force on Clinical Practice Guidelines. Hypertension. 
2018;71:e13–e115.
 21. Amsterdam EA, Kirk JD, Bluemke DA, et al. Testing of low-risk patients pre-
senting to the emergency department with chest pain: a scientific statement 
from the American Heart Association. Circulation. 2010;122:1756–1776.
 22. Fox CS, Golden SH, Anderson C, et al. Update on prevention of cardio-
vascular disease in adults with type 2 diabetes mellitus in light of recent 
evidence: a scientific statement from the American Heart Association and 
the American Diabetes Association. Circulation. 2015;132:691–718.
 23. Grohskopf LA, Sokolow LZ, Broder KR, et al. Prevention and control of sea-
sonal influenza with vaccines: recommendations of the Advisory Commit-
tee on Immunization Practices-United States, 2018-19 Influenza Season. 
MMWR Recomm Rep. 2018;67:1–20.
1.4.1. Scope of the Problem
 1. Rui P, Kang K. National Hospital Ambulatory Medical Care Survey: 2017 
emergency department summary tables. National Center for Health Sta-
tistics. Available at: https://www.cdc.gov/nchs/data/nhamcs/web_ta-
bles/2017_ed_web_tables-508.pdf. Accessed February 12, 2021.
 2. Rui P, Okeyode T. National Ambulatory Medical Care Survey: 2016 national 
summary tables. 2016 Available at: https://www.cdc.gov/nchs/data/ahcd/
namcs_summary/2016_namcs_web_tables.pdf. Accessed February 12, 
2021.
 3. Virani SS, Alonso A, Benjamin EJ, et al. Heart disease and stroke statis-
tics-2020 update: a report from the American Heart Association. Circulation. 
2020;141:e139–e596.
 4. Ruigomez A, Rodriguez LA, Wallander MA, et al. Chest pain in general prac-
tice: incidence, comorbidity and mortality. Fam Pract. 2006;23:167–174.
 5. Bosner S, Becker A, Haasenritter J, et al. Chest pain in primary care: epide-
miology and pre-work-up probabilities. Eur J Gen Pract. 2009;15:141–146.
 6. Hsia RY, Hale Z, Tabas JA. A national study of the prevalence of life-
threatening diagnoses in patients with chest pain. JAMA Intern Med. 
2016;176:1029–1032.
1.4.2. Defining Chest Pain
 1. Canto JG, Rogers WJ, Goldberg RJ, et al. Association of age and sex with 
myocardial infarction symptom presentation and in-hospital mortality. JAMA. 
2012;307:813–822.
 2. van der Meer MG, Backus BE, van der Graaf Y, et al. The diagnostic val-
ue of clinical symptoms in women and men presenting with chest pain 
at the emergency department, a prospective cohort study. PLoS One. 
2015;10:e0116431.
 3. Hemal K, Pagidipati NJ, Coles A, et al. Sex differences in demographics, 
risk factors, presentation, and noninvasive testing in stable outpatients with suspected coronary artery disease: insights from the PROMISE trial. J Am 
Coll Cardiol Img. 2016;9:337–346.
 4. Lichtman JH, Leifheit EC, Safdar B, et al. Sex differences in the presentation 
and perception of symptoms among young patients with myocardial infarc-
tion: evidence from the VIRGO Study (Variation in Recovery: Role of Gender 
on Outcomes of Young AMI Patients) Circulation. 2018;137:781–790.
 5. Bosner S, Haasenritter J, Hani MA, et al. Gender differences in pre-
sentation and diagnosis of chest pain in primary care. BMC Fam Pract.  
2009;10:79.
 6. Ferry AV, Anand A, Strachan FE, et al. Presenting symptoms in men and 
women diagnosed with myocardial infarction using sex-specific criteria. J 
Am Heart Assoc. 2019;8:e012307 .
 7 . Kreatsoulas C, Fleegler EW, Kubzansky LD, et al. Young adults and ad-
verse childhood events: a potent measure of cardiovascular risk. Am J Med. 
2019;132:605–613.
2. INITIAL EVALUATION
2.1. History
 1. Amsterdam EA, Wenger NK, Brindis RG, et al. 2014 AHA/ACC guideline 
for the management of patients with non-ST-elevation acute coronary syn-
dromes: a report of the American College of Cardiology/American Heart 
Association Task Force on Practice Guidelines. Circulation. 2014;130: 
e344–e426
 2. Lindsell CJ, Anantharaman V, Diercks D, et al. The Internet Tracking Registry 
of Acute Coronary Syndromes (i*trACS): a multicenter registry of patients 
with suspicion of acute coronary syndromes reported using the standard-
ized reporting guidelines for emergency department chest pain studies. Ann 
Emerg Med. 2006;48:666–677; 77 e1–9.
 3. Hsia RY, Hale Z, Tabas JA. A national study of the prevalence of life-
threatening diagnoses in patients with chest pain. JAMA Intern Med. 
2016;176:1029–1032.
 4. Fanaroff AC, Rymer JA, Goldstein SA, et al. Does this patient with chest pain 
have acute coronary syndrome?: the rational clinical examination systematic 
review. JAMA. 2015;314:1955–1965.
 5. Diercks DB, Boghos E, Guzman H, et al. Changes in the numeric descriptive 
scale for pain after sublingual nitroglycerin do not predict cardiac etiology of 
chest pain. Ann Emerg Med. 2005;45:581–585.
2.1.1. A Focus on the Uniqueness of Chest Pain in 
Women
 1. Hemal K, Pagidipati NJ, Coles A, et al. Sex differences in demographics, 
risk factors, presentation, and noninvasive testing in stable outpatients with 
suspected coronary artery disease: insights from the PROMISE trial. J Am 
Coll Cardiol Img. 2016;9:337–346.
 2. Garcia M, Mulvagh SL, Merz CN, et al. Cardiovascular disease in women: 
clinical perspectives. Circ Res. 2016;118:1273–1293.
 3. Lichtman JH, Leifheit EC, Safdar B, et al. Sex differences in the pre-
sentation and perception of symptoms among young patients with myo-
cardial infarction: evidence from the VIRGO Study (Variation in Recov-
ery: Role of Gender on Outcomes of Young AMI Patients) Circulation. 
2018;137:781–790.
 4. Pelletier R, Khan NA, Cox J, et al. Sex versus gender-related characteristics: 
which predicts outcome after acute coronary syndrome in the young? J Am 
Coll Cardiol. 2016;67:127–135.
 5. Ferry AV, Anand A, Strachan FE, et al. Presenting symptoms in men and 
women diagnosed with myocardial infarction using sex-specific criteria. J 
Am Heart Assoc. 2019;8:e012307 .
 6. Kreatsoulas C, Dinakar D, Mehta S, et al. Machine learning to evaluate gen-
der differences in typical and atypical angina among patients with obstruc-
tive coronary artery disease. ESC Congress 2019. Paris, France. 2019.
 7 . DeFilippis EM, Collins BL, Singh A, et al. Women who experience a myocar-
dial infarction at a young age have worse outcomes compared with men: the 
Mass General Brigham YOUNG-MI registry. Eur Heart J. 2020;41:4127–
4137 .
 8. Rui P, Kang K, Ashman JJ. National Hospital Ambulatory Medical Care 
Survey: 2016 Emergency Department Summary Tables. 2016 Available 
at: https://www.cdc.gov/nchs/data/ahcd/nhamcs_emergency/2016_ed_
web_tables.pdf. Accessed July 26, 2021.
 9. Reynolds HR, Shaw LJ, Min JK, et al. Association of sex with severity of 
coronary artery disease, ischemia, and symptom burden in patients with 
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on November 12, 2025

Circulation. 2021;144:e368–e454. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000001029 November 30, 2021 e423
Gulati et al 2021 Chest Pain GuidelineCLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINESmoderate or severe ischemia: secondary analysis of the ISCHEMIA ran-
domized clinical trial. JAMA Cardiol. 2020;5:1–14.
 10. Meisel ZF, Armstrong K, Mechem CC, et al. Influence of sex on the out-of-
hospital management of chest pain. Acad Emerg Med. 2010;17:80–87 .
 11. Khan NA, Daskalopoulou SS, Karp I, et al. Sex differences in prodromal 
symptoms in acute coronary syndrome in patients aged 55 years or young-
er. Heart. 2017;103:863–869.
 12. Roger VL, Farkouh ME, Weston SA, et al. Sex differences in evaluation and 
outcome of unstable angina. JAMA. 2000;283:646–652.
 13. McSweeney JC, Cleves MA, Zhao W, et al. Cluster analysis of women's 
prodromal and acute myocardial infarction symptoms by race and other 
characteristics. J Cardiovasc Nurs. 2010;25:311–322.
 14. Safdar B, Nagurney JT, Anise A, et al. Gender-specific research for 
emergency diagnosis and management of ischemic heart disease: pro-
ceedings from the 2014 Academic Emergency Medicine Consensus 
Conference Cardiovascular Research Workgroup. Acad Emerg Med. 
2014;21:1350–1360.
 15. Khan NA, Daskalopoulou SS, Karp I, et al. Sex differences in acute coro-
nary syndrome symptom presentation in young patients. JAMA Intern Med. 
2013;173:1863–1871.
 16. Tamis-Holland JE, Lu J, Korytkowski M, et al. Sex differences in presen-
tation and outcome among patients with type 2 diabetes and coronary 
artery disease treated with contemporary medical therapy with or without 
prompt revascularization: a report from the BARI 2D Trial (Bypass An-
gioplasty Revascularization Investigation 2 Diabetes) J Am Coll Cardiol. 
2013;61:1767–1776.
2.1.2. Considerations for Older Patients With Chest 
Pain
 1. Grosmaitre P, Le Vavasseur O, Yachouh E, et al. Significance of atypical 
symptoms for the diagnosis and management of myocardial infarction in 
elderly patients admitted to emergency departments. Arch Cardiovasc Dis. 
2013;106:586–592.
 2. Jokhadar M, Wenger NK. Review of the treatment of acute coronary syn-
drome in elderly patients. Clin Interv Aging. 2009;4:435–444.
 3. Gupta R, Munoz R. Evaluation and management of chest pain in the elderly. 
Emerg Med Clin North Am. 2016;34:523–542.
 4. Lowenstern A, Alexander KP, Hill CL, et al. Age-related differences in the 
noninvasive evaluation for possible coronary artery disease: insights from 
the Prospective Multicenter Imaging Study for Evaluation of Chest Pain 
(PROMISE) Trial. JAMA Cardiol. 2020;5:193–201.
2.1.3. Considerations for Diverse Patient 
Populations With Chest Pain
 1. Virani SS, Alonso A, Benjamin EJ, et al. Heart disease and stroke statis-
tics-2020 update: a report from the American Heart Association. Circulation. 
2020;141:e139–e596.
 2. DeVon HA, Burke LA, Nelson H, et al. Disparities in patients presenting to 
the emergency department with potential acute coronary syndrome: it mat-
ters if you are Black or White. Heart Lung. 2014;43:270–277 .
 3. Alrwisan A, Eworuke E. Are discrepancies in waiting time for chest pain at 
emergency departments between African Americans and Whites improving 
over time? J Emerg Med. 2016;50:349–355.
 4. Graham G. Racial and ethnic differences in acute coronary syndrome and 
myocardial infarction within the United States: from demographics to out-
comes. Clin Cardiol. 2016;39:299–306.
 5. Lopez L, Wilper AP, Cervantes MC, et al. Racial and sex differences in 
emergency department triage assessment and test ordering for chest pain, 
1997-2006 Acad Emerg Med. 2010;17:801–808.
 6. Mozaffarian D, Benjamin EJ, Go AS, et al. Heart disease and stroke statis-
tics–2015 update: a report from the American Heart Association. Circula-
tion. 2015;131:e29–e322.
 7 . Olson MB, Kelsey SF, Matthews K, et al. Symptoms, myocardial ischaemia 
and quality of life in women: results from the NHLBI-sponsored WISE 
Study. Eur Heart J. 2003;24:1506–1514.
 8. Volgman AS, Palaniappan LS, Aggarwal NT, et al. Atherosclerotic cardio-
vascular disease in South Asians in the United States: epidemiology, risk 
factors, and treatments: a scientific statement from the American Heart As-
sociation. Circulation. 2018;138:e1–e34.
 9. Kendall H, Marley A, Patel JV, et al. Hospital delay in South Asian patients 
with acute ST-elevation myocardial infarction in the UK. Eur J Prev Cardiol. 
2013;20:737–742. 10. Zaman MJ, Junghans C, Sekhri N, et al. Presentation of stable an-
gina pectoris among women and South Asian people. CMAJ. 2008;179: 
659–667 .
 11. King-Shier K, Quan H, Kapral MK, et al. Acute coronary syndromes presen-
tations and care outcomes in white, South Asian and Chinese patients: a 
cohort study. BMJ Open. 2019;9:e022479.
2.1.4. Patient-Centric Considerations
 1. Leifheit-Limson EC, D'Onofrio G, Daneshvar M, et al. Sex differences in 
cardiac risk factors, perceived risk, and health care provider discussion of 
risk and risk modification among young patients with acute myocardial in-
farction: the VIRGO Study. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2015;66:1949–1957 .
 2. Mathews R, Peterson ED, Li S, et al. Use of emergency medical service 
transport among patients with ST-segment-elevation myocardial infarction: 
findings from the National Cardiovascular Data Registry Acute Coronary 
Treatment Intervention Outcomes Network Registry-Get With The Guide-
lines. Circulation. 2011;124:154–163.
 3. Becker L, Larsen MP, Eisenberg MS. Incidence of cardiac arrest during self-
transport for chest pain. Ann Emerg Med. 1996;28:612–616.
 4. Deputy Heart Attack Program with Early Heart Attack Care Education. 
Available at: https://dha.acc.org/. Accessed September 10, 2020.
 5. Merchant RM, Topjian AA, Panchal AR, et al. Part 1: executive summary: 
2020 American Heart Association Guidelines for Cardiopulmonary Re-
suscitation and Emergency Cardiovascular Care. Circulation. 2020;142: 
S337–S357 .
2.2. Physical Examination
 1. Fanaroff AC, Rymer JA, Goldstein SA, et al. Does this patient with chest pain 
have acute coronary syndrome?: the rational clinical examination systematic 
review. JAMA. 2015;314:1955–1965.
 2. McConaghy JR, Oza RS. Outpatient diagnosis of acute chest pain in adults. 
Am Fam Physician. 2013;87:177–182.
 3. Ohle R, Um J, Anjum O, et al. High risk clinical features for acute aortic dis-
section: a case-control study. Acad Emerg Med. 2018;25:378–387 .
 4. Garas G, Zarogoulidis P, Efthymiou A, et al. Spontaneous esophageal rup-
ture as the underlying cause of pneumothorax: early recognition is crucial. J 
Thorac Dis. 2014;6:1655–1658.
 5. Grani C, Senn O, Bischof M, et al. Diagnostic performance of reproducible 
chest wall tenderness to rule out acute coronary syndrome in acute chest 
pain: a prospective diagnostic study. BMJ Open. 2015;5:e007442.
 6. Panju AA, Hemmelgarn BR, Guyatt GH, et al. The rational clinical examina-
tion. Is this patient having a myocardial infarction? JAMA. 1998;280:1256–
1263.
 7 . Perrier A, Desmarais S, Miron MJ, et al. Non-invasive diagnosis of venous 
thromboembolism in outpatients. Lancet. 1999;353:190–195.
 8. Tsai TT, Trimarchi S, Nienaber CA. Acute aortic dissection: perspectives from 
the International Registry of Acute Aortic Dissection (IRAD) Eur J Vasc En-
dovasc Surg. 2009;37:149–159.
 9. von Kodolitsch Y, Schwartz AG, Nienaber CA. Clinical prediction of acute 
aortic dissection. Arch Intern Med. 2000;160:2977–2982.
 10. Klompas M. Does this patient have an acute thoracic aortic dissection? 
JAMA. 2002;287:2262–2272.
2.3. Diagnostic Testing
2.3.1. Setting Considerations
 1. Diercks DB, Kontos MC, Chen AY, et al. Utilization and impact of pre-
hospital electrocardiograms for patients with acute ST-segment elevation 
myocardial infarction: data from the NCDR (National Cardiovascular Data 
Registry) ACTION (Acute Coronary Treatment and Intervention Outcomes 
Network) Registry. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2009;53:161–166.
 2. Puymirat E, Simon T, Steg PG, et al. Association of changes in clinical char-
acteristics and management with improvement in survival among patients 
with ST-elevation myocardial infarction. JAMA. 2012;308:998–1006.
 3. Jollis JG, Granger CB, Henry TD, et al. Systems of care for ST-segment-
elevation myocardial infarction: a report from the American Heart Associa-
tion's Mission: Lifeline. Circ Cardiovasc Qual Outcomes. 2012;5:423–428.
 4. Postma S, Bergmeijer T, ten Berg J, et al. Pre-hospital diagnosis, triage 
and treatment in patients with ST elevation myocardial infarction. Heart. 
2012;98:1674–1678.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on November 12, 2025

November 30, 2021 Circulation. 2021;144:e368–e454. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000001029 e424
Gulati et al 2021 Chest Pain GuidelineCLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINES 5. Patel M, Dunford JV, Aguilar S, et al. Pre-hospital electrocardiography by 
emergency medical personnel: effects on scene and transport times for 
chest pain and ST-segment elevation myocardial infarction patients. J Am 
Coll Cardiol. 2012;60:806–811.
 6. O'Gara PT, Kushner FG, Ascheim DD, et al. 2013 ACCF/AHA guide-
line for the management of ST-elevation myocardial infarction: a re-
port of the American College of Cardiology Foundation/American 
Heart Association Task Force on Practice Guidelines. Circulation. 
2013;127:e362–e425.
 7 . Amsterdam EA, Wenger NK, Brindis RG, et al. 2014 AHA/ACC guideline 
for the management of patients with non-ST-elevation acute coronary syn-
dromes: a report of the American College of Cardiology/American Heart As-
sociation Task Force on Practice Guidelines. Circulation. 2014;130:e344–
e426.
 8. Neumann JT, Twerenbold R, Ojeda F, et al. Application of high-sensitivity tro-
ponin in suspected myocardial infarction. N Engl J Med. 2019;380:2529–
2540.
 9. Thygesen K, Alpert JS, Jaffe AS, et al. Fourth universal definition of myocar-
dial infarction (2018). Circulation. 2018;138:e618–e651.
 10. Becker L, Larsen MP, Eisenberg MS. Incidence of cardiac arrest during self-
transport for chest pain. Ann Emerg Med. 1996;28:612–616.
 11. Hsiao CJ, Cherry DK, Beatty PC, et al. National ambulatory medical care 
survey: 2007 summary. Natl Health Stat Report. 2010:1–32.
2.3.2. Electrocardiogram
 1. Amsterdam EA, Wenger NK, Brindis RG, et al. 2014 AHA/ACC guide-
line for the management of patients with non-ST-elevation acute coro-
nary syndromes: a report of the American College of Cardiology/Ameri-
can Heart Association Task Force on Practice Guidelines. Circulation. 
2014;130:e344–e426.
 2. O'Gara PT, Kushner FG, Ascheim DD, et al. 2013 ACCF/AHA guideline 
for the management of STelevation myocardial infarction: a report of the 
American College of Cardiology Foundation/American Heart Association 
Task Force on Practice Guidelines. Circulation. 2013;127:e362–e425.
 3. Vogiatzis I, Koulouris E, Ioannidis A, et al. The importance of the 15-lead 
versus 12-lead ECG recordings in the diagnosis and treatment of right ven-
tricle and left ventricle posterior and lateral wall acute myocardial infarc-
tions. Acta Inform Med. 2019;27:35–39.
 4. Ashida T, Tani S, Nagao K, et al. Usefulness of synthesized 18-lead electro-
cardiography in the diagnosis of ST-elevation myocardial infarction: a pilot 
study. Am J Emerg Med. 2017;35:448–457 .
 5. Matetzky S, Freimark D, Feinberg MS, et al. Acute myocardial infarction with 
isolated ST-segment elevation in posterior chest leads V7-9: “hidden” ST-
segment elevations revealing acute posterior infarction. J Am Coll Cardiol. 
1999;34:748–753.
 6. Jain S, Ting HT, Bell M, et al. Utility of left bundle branch block as a diagnos-
tic criterion for acute myocardial infarction. Am J Cardiol. 2011;107:1111–
1116.
 7 . Ohlsson M, Ohlin H, Wallerstedt SM, et al. Usefulness of serial electro-
cardiograms for diagnosis of acute myocardial infarction. Am J Cardiol. 
2001;88:478–481.
 8. Mant J, McManus RJ, Oakes RA, et al. Systematic review and modelling of 
the investigation of acute and chronic chest pain presenting in primary care. 
Health Technol Assess. 2004;8(iii):1–158.
 9. Chase M, Brown AM, Robey JL, et al. Prognostic value of symptoms 
during a normal or nonspecific electrocardiogram in emergency depart-
ment patients with potential acute coronary syndrome. Acad Emerg Med. 
2006;13:1034–1039.
 10. Turnipseed SD, Trythall WS, Diercks DB, et al. Frequency of acute coronary 
syndrome in patients with normal electrocardiogram performed during pres-
ence or absence of chest pain. Acad Emerg Med. 2009;16:495–499.
 11. Pasceri V, Cianflone D, Finocchiaro ML, et al. Relation between myocardial 
infarction site and pain location in Q-wave acute myocardial infarction. Am J 
Cardiol. 1995;75:224–227 .
 12. Pope JH, Aufderheide TP, Ruthazer R, et al. Missed diagnoses of 
acute cardiac ischemia in the emergency department. N Engl J Med. 
2000;342:1163–1170.
 13. McCarthy BD, Beshansky JR, D'Agostino RB, et al. Missed diagnoses of 
acute myocardial infarction in the emergency department: results from a 
multicenter study. Ann Emerg Med. 1993;22:579–582.
 14. Canto JG, Fincher C, Kiefe CI, et al. Atypical presentations among 
Medicare beneficiaries with unstable angina pectoris. Am J Cardiol. 
2002;90:248–253. 15. Savonitto S, Ardissino D, Granger CB, et al. Prognostic value of the admission 
electrocardiogram in acute coronary syndromes. JAMA. 1999;281:707–
713.
 16. Rouan GW, Lee TH, Cook EF, et al. Clinical characteristics and outcome of 
acute myocardial infarction in patients with initially normal or nonspecific 
electrocardiograms (a report from the Multicenter Chest Pain Study) Am J 
Cardiol. 1989;64:1087–1092.
 17 . Slater DK, Hlatky MA, Mark DB, et al. Outcome in suspected acute myocar-
dial infarction with normal or minimally abnormal admission electrocardio-
graphic findings. Am J Cardiol. 1987;60:766–770.
 18. Fesmire FM. Which chest pain patients potentially benefit from continuous 
12-lead ST-segment monitoring with automated serial ECG? Am J Emerg 
Med. 2000;18:773–778.
 19. Fesmire FM, Percy RF, Bardoner JB, et al. Usefulness of automated serial 
12-lead ECG monitoring during the initial emergency department evaluation 
of patients with chest pain. Ann Emerg Med. 1998;31:3–11.
 20. Challa PK, Smith KM, Conti CR. Initial presenting electrocardiogram as 
determinant for hospital admission in patients presenting to the emer-
gency department with chest pain: a pilot investigation. Clin Cardiol. 
2007;30:558–561.
 21. Thygesen K, Alpert JS, Jaffe AS, et al. Fourth universal definition of myocar-
dial infarction (2018). Circulation. 2018;138:e618–e651.
 22. Levine GN, Bates ER, Blankenship JC, et al. 2015 ACC/AHA/SCAI fo-
cused update on primary percutaneous coronary intervention for patients 
with ST-elevation myocardial infarction: an update of the 2011 ACCF/
AHA/SCAI guideline for percutaneous coronary intervention and the 2013 
ACCF/AHA guideline for the management of ST-elevation myocardial in-
farction. Circulation. 2016;133:1135–1147 .
2.3.3. Chest Radiography
 1. Hess EP, Perry JJ, Ladouceur P, et al. Derivation of a clinical decision rule 
for chest radiography in emergency department patients with chest pain 
and possible acute coronary syndrome. CJEM. 2010;12:128–134.
 2. Amsterdam EA, Wenger NK, Brindis RG, et al. 2014 AHA/ACC guideline 
for the management of patients with non-ST-elevation acute coronary syn-
dromes: a report of the American College of Cardiology/American Heart As-
sociation Task Force on Practice Guidelines. Circulation. 2014;130:e344–
e426.
 3. Yancy CW, Jessup M, Bozkurt B, et al. 2013 ACCF/ AHA guideline for the 
management of heart failure: a report of the American College of Cardiol-
ogy Foundation/American Heart Association Task Force on Practice Guide-
lines. Circulation. 2013;128:e240–e327 .
 4. Harris KM, Strauss CE, Eagle KA, et al. Correlates of delayed recognition 
and treatment of acute type A aortic dissection: the International Registry of 
Acute Aortic Dissection (IRAD) Circulation. 2011;124:1911–1918.
2.3.4. Biomarkers
 1. Apple FS, Jesse RL, Newby LK, et al. National academy of clinical 
biochemistry and IFCC committee for standardization of markers of 
cardiac damage laboratory medicine practice guidelines: analytical is-
sues for biochemical markers of acute coronary syndromes. Circulation. 
2007;115:e352–e355.
 2. Bandstein N, Ljung R, Johansson M, et al. Undetectable high-sensitivity car-
diac troponin T level in the emergency department and risk of myocardial 
infarction. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2014;63:2569–2578.
 3. Body R, Burrows G, Carley S, et al. High-sensitivity cardiac troponin t con-
centrations below the limit of detection to exclude acute myocardial infarc-
tion: a prospective evaluation. Clin Chem. 2015;61:983–989.
 4. Body R, Carley S, McDowell G, et al. Rapid exclusion of acute myocardial 
infarction in patients with undetectable troponin using a high-sensitivity as-
say. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2011;58:1332–1339.
 5. Boeddinghaus J, Nestelberger T, Twerenbold R, et al. Direct comparison of 
4 very early rule-out strategies for acute myocardial infarction using high-
sensitivity cardiac troponin I. Circulation. 2017;135:1597–1611.
 6. Chapman AR, Anand A, Boeddinghaus J, et al. Comparison of the efficacy 
and safety of early rule-out pathways for acute myocardial infarction. Circu-
lation. 2017;135:1586–1596.
 7 . de Lemos JA, Morrow DA, deFilippi CR. Highly sensitive troponin as-
says and the cardiology community: a love/hate relationship? Clin Chem. 
2011;57:826–829.
 8. Jaffe AS, Apple FS, Morrow DA, et al. Being rational about (im)precision: a 
statement from the Biochemistry Subcommittee of the Joint European So-
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on November 12, 2025

Circulation. 2021;144:e368–e454. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000001029 November 30, 2021 e425
Gulati et al 2021 Chest Pain GuidelineCLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINESciety of Cardiology/American College of Cardiology Foundation/American 
Heart Association/World Heart Federation Task Force for the Definition of 
Myocardial Infarction. Clin Chem. 2010;56:941–943.
 9. Morrow DA, Cannon CP, Jesse RL, et al. National academy of clinical bio-
chemistry laboratory medicine practice guidelines: clinical characteristics 
and utilization of biochemical markers in acute coronary syndromes. Circula-
tion. 2007;115:e356–e375.
 10. Mueller C, Giannitsis E, Christ M, et al. Multicenter evaluation of a 0-hour/1-
hour algorithm in the diagnosis of myocardial infarction with high-sensitivity 
cardiac troponin T. Ann Emerg Med. 2016;68:76–87 , e4.
 11. Odqvist M, Andersson PO, T ygesen H, et al. High-sensitivity troponins and 
outcomes after myocardial infarction. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2018;71:2616–
2624.
 12. Peacock WF, Baumann BM, Bruton D, et al. Efficacy of high-sensitivity tro-
ponin T in identifying very-low-risk patients with possible acute coronary 
syndrome. JAMA Cardiol. 2018;3:104–111.
 13. Reichlin T, Schindler C, Drexler B, et al. One-hour rule-out and rule-in of 
acute myocardial infarction using high-sensitivity cardiac troponin T. Arch 
Intern Med. 2012;172:1211–1218.
 14. Reichlin T, Twerenbold R, Maushart C, et al. Risk stratification in patients 
with unstable angina using absolute serial changes of 3 high-sensitive tro-
ponin assays. Am Heart J. 2013;165:371–378.e3.
 15. Rubini Gimenez M, Hoeller R, Reichlin T, et al. Rapid rule out of acute myo-
cardial infarction using undetectable levels of high-sensitivity cardiac tropo-
nin. Int J Cardiol. 2013;168:3896–3901.
 16. Rubini Gimenez M, Twerenbold R, Jaeger C, et al. One-hour rule-in and rule-
out of acute myocardial infarction using high-sensitivity cardiac troponin I. 
Am J Med. 2015;128:861–870, e4.
 17 . Twerenbold R, Boeddinghaus J, Nestelberger T, et al. Clinical use of high-
sensitivity cardiac troponin in patients with suspected myocardial infarction. 
J Am Coll Cardiol. 2017;70:996–1012.
 18. Twerenbold R, Neumann JT, Sorensen NA, et al. Prospective validation of 
the 0/1-h algorithm for early diagnosis of myocardial infarction. J Am Coll 
Cardiol. 2018;72:620–632.
 19. Wildi K, Nelles B, Twerenbold R, et al. Safety and efficacy of the 0 
h/3 h protocol for rapid rule out of myocardial infarction. Am Heart J. 
2016;181:16–25.
 20. Zhelev Z, Hyde C, Youngman E, et al. Diagnostic accuracy of single baseline 
measurement of Elecsys Troponin T high-sensitive assay for diagnosis of 
acute myocardial infarction in emergency department: systematic review 
and meta-analysis. BMJ. 2015;350:h15.
 21. Thygesen K, Alpert JS, Jaffe AS, et al. Fourth universal definition of myocar-
dial infarction (2018). Circulation. 2018;138:e618–e651.
 22. Cullen L, Mueller C, Parsonage WA, et al. Validation of high-sensitivity tro-
ponin I in a 2-hour diagnostic strategy to assess 30-day outcomes in emer-
gency department patients with possible acute coronary syndrome. J Am 
Coll Cardiol. 2013;62:1242–1249.
 23. Lipinski MJ, Baker NC, Escarcega RO, et al. Comparison of conventional 
and high-sensitivity troponin in patients with chest pain: a collaborative 
meta-analysis. Am Heart J. 2015;169:6–16, e6.
 24. Twerenbold R, Wildi K, Jaeger C, et al. Optimal cutoff levels of more 
sensitive cardiac troponin assays for the early diagnosis of myocar-
dial infarction in patients with renal dysfunction. Circulation. 2015;131: 
2041–2050.
 25. van Wijk S, Jacobs L, Eurlings LW, et al. Troponin T measurements by high-
sensitivity vs conventional assays for risk stratification in acute dyspnea. Clin 
Chem. 2012;58:284–292.
 26. Neumann JT, Twerenbold R, Ojeda F, et al. Application of high-sensitivity tro-
ponin in suspected myocardial infarction. N Engl J Med. 2019;380:2529–
2540.
 27 . Aviles RJ, Wright RS, Aviles JM, et al. Long-term prognosis of patients with 
clinical unstable angina pectoris without elevation of creatine kinase but 
with elevation of cardiac troponin I levels. Am J Cardiol. 2002;90:875–878.
 28. Eggers KM, Oldgren J, Nordenskjold A, et al. Diagnostic value of serial mea-
surement of cardiac markers in patients with chest pain: limited value of 
adding myoglobin to troponin I for exclusion of myocardial infarction. Am 
Heart J. 2004;148:574–581.
 29. Kavsak PA, MacRae AR, Newman AM, et al. Effects of contemporary tropo-
nin assay sensitivity on the utility of the early markers myoglobin and CKMB 
isoforms in evaluating patients with possible acute myocardial infarction. 
Clin Chim Acta. 2007;380:213–216.
 30. Kontos MC, de Lemos JA, Ou FS, et al. Troponin-positive, MB-negative 
patients with non-ST-elevation myocardial infarction: an undertreated but 
high-risk patient group: results from the National Cardiovascular Data Registry Acute Coronary Treatment and Intervention Outcomes Network-
Get With The Guidelines (NCDR ACTION-GWTG) Registry. Am Heart J. 
2010;160:819–825.
 31. Newby LK, Roe MT, Chen AY, et al. Frequency and clinical implications of 
discordant creatine kinase-MB and troponin measurements in acute coro-
nary syndromes. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2006;47:312–318.
 32. Volz KA, McGillicuddy DC, Horowitz GL, et al. Creatine kinase-MB does not 
add additional benefit to a negative troponin in the evaluation of chest pain. 
Am J Emerg Med. 2012;30:188–190.
 33. Reichlin T, Twerenbold R, Wildi K, et al. Prospective validation of a 1-hour 
algorithm to rule-out and rule-in acute myocardial infarction using a high-
sensitivity cardiac troponin T assay. CMAJ. 2015;187:E243–E252.
 34. Shah AS, Griffiths M, Lee KK, et al. High sensitivity cardiac troponin and 
the under-diagnosis of myocardial infarction in women: prospective cohort 
study. BMJ. 2015;350:g7873.
 35. Morrow DA. The Fourth Universal Definition of Myocardial Infarc-
tion and the Emerging Importance of Myocardial Injury. Circulation. 
2020;141:172–175.
3. CARDIAC TESTING GENERAL 
CONSIDERATIONS
 1. Wolk MJ, Bailey SR, Doherty JU, et al. ACCF/AHA/ASE/ASNC/HFSA/
HRS/SCAI/SCCT/SCMR/STS 2013 multimodality appropriate use criteria 
for the detection and risk assessment of stable ischemic heart disease: a 
report of the American College of Cardiology Foundation Appropriate Use 
Criteria Task Force, American Heart Association, American Society of Echo-
cardiography, American Society of Nuclear Cardiology, Heart Failure Society 
of America, Heart Rhythm Society, Society for Cardiovascular Angiography 
and Interventions, Society of Cardiovascular Computed Tomography, Soci-
ety for Cardiovascular Magnetic Resonance, and Society of Thoracic Sur-
geons. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2014;63:380–406.
 2. Medicare Program: Changes to Hospital Outpatient Prospective Payment 
and Ambulatory Surgical Center Payment Systems and Quality Reporting 
Programs; Revisions of Organ Procurement Organizations Conditions of 
Coverage; Prior Authorization Process and Requirements for Certain Cov-
ered Outpatient Department Services; Potential Changes to the Laboratory 
Date of Service Policy; Changes to Grandfathered Children's Hospitals-
Within-Hospitals; Notice of Closure of Two Teaching Hospitals and Op-
portunity To Apply for Available Slots. Available at: https://www.cms.gov/
Medicare/Medicare-Fee-for-Service-Payment/HospitalOutpatientPPS/
Hospital-Outpatient-Regulations-and-Notices-Items/CMS-1717-FC. Ac-
cessed September 14, 2020.
3.1. Anatomic Testing
3.1.1. Coronary Computed Tomography 
Angiography
 1. Gaur S, Ovrehus KA, Dey D, et al. Coronary plaque quantification and frac-
tional flow reserve by coronary computed tomography angiography identify 
ischaemia-causing lesions. Eur Heart J. 2016;37:1220–1227 .
 2. Ferencik M, Mayrhofer T, Bittner DO, et al. Use of high-risk coronary athero-
sclerotic plaque detection for risk stratification of patients with stable chest 
pain: a secondary analysis of the PROMISE randomized clinical trial. JAMA 
Cardiol. 2018;3:144–152.
 3. Budoff MJ, Mayrhofer T, Ferencik M, et al. Prognostic value of coronary ar-
tery calcium in the PROMISE Study (Prospective Multicenter Imaging Study 
for Evaluation of Chest Pain) Circulation. 2017;136:1993–2005.
 4. Ferencik M, Mayrhofer T, Puchner SB, et al. Computed tomography-based 
high-risk coronary plaque score to predict acute coronary syndrome among 
patients with acute chest pain–Results from the ROMICAT II trial. J Cardio-
vasc Comput Tomogr. 2015;9:538–545.
 5. Puchner SB, Liu T, Mayrhofer T, et al. High-risk plaque detected on coronary 
CT angiography predicts acute coronary syndromes independent of signifi-
cant stenosis in acute chest pain: results from the ROMICAT-II trial. J Am 
Coll Cardiol. 2014;64:684–692.
 6. Motoyama S, Ito H, Sarai M, et al. Plaque characterization by coronary com-
puted tomography angiography and the likelihood of acute coronary events 
in mid-term follow-up. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2015;66:337–346.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on November 12, 2025

November 30, 2021 Circulation. 2021;144:e368–e454. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000001029 e426
Gulati et al 2021 Chest Pain GuidelineCLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINES 7 . Motoyama S, Kondo T, Sarai M, et al. Multislice computed tomographic 
characteristics of coronary lesions in acute coronary syndromes. J Am Coll 
Cardiol. 2007;50:319–326.
 8. Motoyama S, Sarai M, Harigaya H, et al. Computed tomographic angiog-
raphy characteristics of atherosclerotic plaques subsequently resulting in 
acute coronary syndrome. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2009;54:49–57 .
 9. Nørgaard BL, Fairbairn TA, Safian RD, et al. Coronary CT angiography-de-
rived fractional flow reserve testing in patients with stable coronary artery 
disease: recommendations on interpretation and reporting radiology. Radiol-
ogy: Cardiothoracic Imaging. 2019;1:e190050.
 10. Stocker T J, Deseive S, Leipsic J, et al. Reduction in radiation exposure in cardio-
vascular computed tomography imaging: results from the PROspective multi-
center registry on radiaTion dose Estimates of cardiac CT angIOgraphy iN daily 
practice in 2017 (PROTECTION VI) Eur Heart J. 2018;39:3715–3723.
3.1.2. Invasive Coronary Angiography
 1. Fihn SD, Gardin JM, Abrams J, et al. 2012 ACCF/AHA/ACP/AATS/
PCNA/SCAI/STS guideline for the diagnosis and management of patients 
with stable ischemic heart disease: a report of the American College of 
Cardiology Foundation/American Heart Association Task Force on Practice 
Guidelines, and the American College of Physicians, American Association 
for Thoracic Surgery, Preventive Cardiovascular Nurses Association, Society 
for Cardiovascular Angiography and Interventions, and Society of Thoracic 
Surgeons. Circulation. 2012;126:e354–e471.
 2. Amsterdam EA, Wenger NK, Brindis RG, et al. 2014 AHA/ACC guideline 
for the management of patients with non-ST-elevation acute coronary 
syndromes: a report of the American College of Cardiology/Ameri-
can Heart Association Task Force on Practice Guidelines. Circulation. 
2014;130:e344–e426.
 3. Kobayashi T, Hirshfeld JW Jr. Radiation exposure in cardiac catheterization: 
operator behavior matters. Circ Cardiovasc Interv. 2017;10:e005689.
 4. Georges JL, Karam N, Tafflet M, et al. Time-course reduction in patient ex-
posure to radiation from coronary interventional procedures: the Greater 
Paris Area Percutaneous Coronary Intervention Registry. Circ Cardiovasc 
Interv. 2017;10:e005268.
 5. Ford T J, Corcoran D, Berry C. Stable coronary syndromes: pathophysiology, 
diagnostic advances and therapeutic need. Heart. 2018;104:284–292.
 6. Taqueti VR, Shaw LJ, Cook NR, et al. Excess cardiovascular risk in women 
relative to men referred for coronary angiography is associated with se-
verely impaired coronary flow reserve, not obstructive disease. Circulation. 
2017;135:566–577 .
 7 . Ong P, Camici PG, Beltrame JF, et al. International standardization of diag-
nostic criteria for microvascular angina. Int J Cardiol. 2018;250:16–20.
 8. Ford T J, Stanley B, Good R, et al. Stratified medical therapy using invasive 
coronary function testing in angina: the CorMicA Trial. J Am Coll Cardiol. 
2018;72:2841–2855.
3.2. Diagnostic Testing
3.2.1. Exercise ECG
 1. Amsterdam EA, Kirk JD, Bluemke DA, et al. Testing of low-risk patients pre-
senting to the emergency department with chest pain: a scientific statement 
from the American Heart Association. Circulation. 2010;122:1756–1776.
 2. Fihn SD, Gardin JM, Abrams J, et al. 2012 ACCF/AHA/ACP/AATS/
PCNA/SCAI/STS guideline for the diagnosis and management of patients 
with stable ischemic heart disease: a report of the American College of 
Cardiology Foundation/American Heart Association Task Force on Practice 
Guidelines, and the American College of Physicians, American Association 
for Thoracic Surgery, Preventive Cardiovascular Nurses Association, Society 
for Cardiovascular Angiography and Interventions, and Society of Thoracic 
Surgeons. Circulation. 2012;126:e354–e471.
3.2.2. Echocardiography/Stress Echocardiography
 1. Roffi M, Patrono C, Collet JP, et al. 2015 ESC guidelines for the manage-
ment of acute coronary syndromes in patients presenting without per-
sistent ST-segment elevation: Task Force for the Management of Acute 
Coronary Syndromes in Patients Presenting Without Persistent ST-Seg-
ment Elevation of the European Society of Cardiology (ESC) Eur Heart J. 
2016;37:267–315.
 2. Amsterdam EA, Wenger NK, Brindis RG, et al. 2014 AHA/ACC guideline 
for the management of patients with non-ST-elevation acute coronary syndromes: a report of the American College of Cardiology/Ameri-
can Heart Association Task Force on Practice Guidelines. Circulation. 
2014;130:e344–e426.
 3. Pellikka PA, Arruda-Olson A, Chaudhry FA, et al. Guidelines for perfor-
mance, interpretation, and application of stress echocardiography in isch-
emic heart disease: from the American Society of Echocardiography. J Am 
Soc Echocardiogr. 2020;33:1–41.e8.
 4. Cortigiani L, Ciampi Q, Rigo F, et al. Prognostic value of dual imaging 
stress echocardiography following coronary bypass surgery. Int J Cardiol. 
2019;277:266–271.
 5. Cortigiani L, Rigo F, Bovenzi F, et al. The prognostic value of coronary flow 
velocity reserve in two coronary arteries during vasodilator stress echocar-
diography. J Am Soc Echocardiogr. 2019;32:81–91.
 6. Cortigiani L, Ciampi Q, Lombardo A, et al. Age- and gender-specific prog-
nostic cutoff values of coronary flow velocity reserve in vasodilator stress 
echocardiography. J Am Soc Echocardiogr. 2019;32:1307–1317 .
3.2.3. Stress Nuclear (PET or SPECT) Myocardial 
Perfusion Imaging
 1. Fihn SD, Gardin JM, Abrams J, et al. 2012 ACCF/AHA/ACP/AATS/
PCNA/SCAI/STS guideline for the diagnosis and management of patients 
with stable ischemic heart disease: a report of the American College of 
Cardiology Foundation/American Heart Association Task Force on Practice 
Guidelines, and the American College of Physicians, American Association 
for Thoracic Surgery, Preventive Cardiovascular Nurses Association, Society 
for Cardiovascular Angiography and Interventions, and Society of Thoracic 
Surgeons. Circulation. 2012;126:e354–e471.
 2. Shaw LJ, Hage FG, Berman DS, et al. Prognosis in the era of comparative 
effectiveness research: where is nuclear cardiology now and where should 
it be? J Nucl Cardiol. 2012;19:1026–1043.
 3. Green R, Cantoni V, Petretta M, et al. Negative predictive value of stress 
myocardial perfusion imaging and coronary computed tomography angiog-
raphy: a meta-analysis. J Nucl Cardiol. 2017 .
 4. Rozanski A, Gransar H, Min JK, et al. Long-term mortality following normal 
exercise myocardial perfusion SPECT according to coronary disease risk 
factors. J Nucl Cardiol. 2014;21:341–350.
 5. Metz LD, Beattie M, Hom R, et al. The prognostic value of normal exercise 
myocardial perfusion imaging and exercise echocardiography: a meta-anal-
ysis. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2007;49:227–237 .
 6. Dorbala S, Di Carli MF, Beanlands RS, et al. Prognostic value of stress myo-
cardial perfusion positron emission tomography: results from a multicenter 
observational registry. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2013;61:176–184.
 7 . Kay J, Dorbala S, Goyal A, et al. Influence of sex on risk stratification with 
stress myocardial perfusion Rb-82 positron emission tomography: results 
from the PET (Positron Emission Tomography) Prognosis Multicenter Reg-
istry. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2013;62:1866–1876.
 8. Shaw LJ, Cerqueira MD, Brooks MM, et al. Impact of left ventricular func-
tion and the extent of ischemia and scar by stress myocardial perfusion 
imaging on prognosis and therapeutic risk reduction in diabetic patients 
with coronary artery disease: results from the Bypass Angioplasty Re-
vascularization Investigation 2 Diabetes (BARI 2D) trial. J Nucl Cardiol. 
2012;19:658–669.
 9. Gould KL, Johnson NP, Bateman TM, et al. Anatomic versus physiologic 
assessment of coronary artery disease. Role of coronary flow reserve, frac-
tional flow reserve, and positron emission tomography imaging in revascu-
larization decision-making. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2013;62:1639–1653.
 10. Dilsizian V, Bacharach SL, Beanlands RS, et al. ASNC imaging guidelines/
SNMMI procedure standard for positron emission tomography (PET) nucle-
ar cardiology procedures. J Nucl Cardiol. 2016;23:1187–1226.
 11. Taqueti VR, Solomon SD, Shah AM, et al. Coronary microvascular dysfunc-
tion and future risk of heart failure with preserved ejection fraction. Eur 
Heart J. 2018;39:840–849.
 12. Taqueti VR, Shaw LJ, Cook NR, et al. Excess cardiovascular risk in women 
relative to men referred for coronary angiography is associated with se-
verely impaired coronary flow reserve, not obstructive disease. Circulation. 
2017;135:566–577 .
 13. Taqueti VR, Hachamovitch R, Murthy VL, et al. Global coronary flow reserve 
is associated with adverse cardiovascular events independently of luminal 
angiographic severity and modifies the effect of early revascularization. Cir-
culation. 2015;131:19–27 .
 14. Taqueti VR, Everett BM, Murthy VL, et al. Interaction of impaired coro-
nary flow reserve and cardiomyocyte injury on adverse cardiovascular 
outcomes in patients without overt coronary artery disease. Circulation. 
2015;131:528–535.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on November 12, 2025

Circulation. 2021;144:e368–e454. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000001029 November 30, 2021 e427
Gulati et al 2021 Chest Pain GuidelineCLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINES 15. Einstein AJ, Berman DS, Min JK, et al. Patient-centered imaging: shared 
decision making for cardiac imaging procedures with exposure to ionizing 
radiation. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2014;63:1480–1489.
 16. Einstein AJ. Effects of radiation exposure from cardiac imaging: how good 
are the data? J Am Coll Cardiol. 2012;59:553–565.
 17 . Fazel R, Gerber TC, Balter S, et al. Approaches to enhancing radiation safety 
in cardiovascular imaging: a scientific statement from the American Heart 
Association. Circulation. 2014;130:1730–1748.
3.2.4. Cardiovascular Magnetic Resonance  
Imaging
 1. Henzlova MJ, Duvall WL, Einstein AJ, et al. ASNC imaging guidelines for 
SPECT nuclear cardiology procedures: stress, protocols, and tracers. J Nucl 
Cardiol. 2016;23:606–639.
 2. Senior R, Becher H, Monaghan M, et al. Contrast echocardiography: evi-
dence-based recommendations by European Association of Echocardiog-
raphy. Eur J Echocardiogr. 2009;10:194–212.
 3. Patil HR, Main M. Revisiting the safety profile of echocardiography con-
trast agents. Available at: https://www.acc.org/latest-in-cardiology/ar-
ticles/2016/06/23/08/23/revisiting-the-safety-profile-of-echocardiogra-
phy-contrast-agents. Accessed August 16, 2020.
 4. Porter TR, Abdelmoneim S, Belcik JT, et al. Guidelines for the cardiac so-
nographer in the performance of contrast echocardiography: a focused 
update from the American Society of Echocardiography. J Am Soc Echocar-
diogr. 2014;27:797–810.
 5. Pellikka PA, Arruda-Olson A, Chaudhry FA, et al. Guidelines for perfor-
mance, interpretation, and application of stress echocardiography in isch-
emic heart disease: from the American Society of Echocardiography. J Am 
Soc Echocardiogr. 2020;33:1–41.e8.
 6. Kramer CM, Barkhausen J, Bucciarelli-Ducci C, et al. Standardized cardio-
vascular magnetic resonance imaging (CMR) protocols: 2020 update. J 
Cardiovasc Magn Reson. 2020;22:17 .
 7 . Narula J, Chandrashekhar Y, Ahmadi A, et al. SCCT 2021 Expert consen-
sus document on coronary computed tomographic angiography: a report of 
the Society of Cardiovascular Computed Tomography. J Cardiovasc Comput 
Tomogr. 2021;15:192–217 .
 8. Gibbons RJ, Balady GJ, Beasley JW, et al. ACC/AHA Guidelines for ex-
ercise testing. a report of the American College of Cardiology/American 
Heart Association Task Force on Practice Guidelines (Committee on Exer-
cise Testing) J Am Coll Cardiol. 1997;30:260–311.
 9. Fletcher GF, Ades PA, Kligfield P, et al. Exercise standards for testing and 
training: a scientific statement from the American Heart Association. Circu-
lation. 2013;128:873–934.
 10. Henzlova MJ, Cerqueira MD, Mahmarian JJ, et al. Stress protocols and trac-
ers. J Nucl Cardiol. 2006;13:e80–e90.
 11. SNM Procedure Guideline for General Imaging 6.0 Available at: https://
s3.amazonaws.com/rdcms-snmmi/files/production/public/docs/General_
Imaging_Version_6.0.pdf. Accessed July 26, 2021.
 12. Committee on Obstetric Practice. Committee Opinion No. 723: Guidelines 
for diagnostic imaging during pregnancy and lactation. Obstet Gynecol. 
2017;130:e210–e216.
 13. Ashwath M. Safety of CMR During Pregnancy and Lactation. Available at: 
https://scmr.org/page/Pregnancy. Accessed November 9, 2020.
 14. ACR-SPR practice parameter for imaging pregnant or potentially pregnant 
adolescents and women with ionizing radiation. Available at: https://www.
acr.org/-/media/ACR/Files/Practice-Parameters/pregnant-pts.pdf. Ac-
cessed November 9, 2020.
3.3. Cardiac Testing Considerations for Women 
Who Are Pregnant, Postpartum, or of  
Child- Bearing Age
 1. Image Wisely. Available at: https://imagewisely.org. Accessed September 
10, 2020.
 2. Committee on Obstetric Practice. Committee Opinion No. 723: Guidelines 
for diagnostic imaging during pregnancy and lactation. Obstet Gynecol. 
2017;130:e210–e216.
 3. Ray JG, Vermeulen MJ, Bharatha A, et al. Association between MRI ex-
posure during pregnancy and fetal and childhood outcomes. JAMA. 
2016;316:952–961.
 4. Kodzwa R. ACR manual on contrast media: 2018 updates. Radiol Technol. 
2019;91:97–100. 5. Expert Panel on MRSKanal E, Barkovich AJ, et al. ACR guidance document 
on MR safe practices: 2013 J Magn Reson Imaging. 2013;37:501–530.
 6. Truong QA, Rinehart S, Abbara S, et al. Coronary computed tomographic 
imaging in women: an expert consensus statement from the Society of 
Cardiovascular Computed Tomography. J Cardiovasc Comput Tomogr. 
2018;12:451–466.
4. CHOOSING THE RIGHT PATHWAY WITH 
PATIENT-CENTRIC ALGORITHMS FOR 
ACUTE CHEST PAIN
4.1. Patients With Acute Chest Pain and 
Suspected ACS (Not Including STEMI)
 1. Apple FS, Jesse RL, Newby LK, et al. National academy of clinical biochem-
istry and IFCC committee for standardization of markers of cardiac damage 
laboratory medicine practice guidelines: analytical issues for biochemical 
markers of acute coronary syndromes. Circulation. 2007;115:e352–e355.
 2. Bandstein N, Ljung R, Johansson M, et al. Undetectable high-sensitivity car-
diac troponin T level in the emergency department and risk of myocardial 
infarction. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2014;63:2569–2578.
 3. Body R, Burrows G, Carley S, et al. High-sensitivity cardiac troponin t con-
centrations below the limit of detection to exclude acute myocardial infarc-
tion: a prospective evaluation. Clin Chem. 2015;61:983–989.
 4. Body R, Carley S, McDowell G, et al. Rapid exclusion of acute myocardial 
infarction in patients with undetectable troponin using a high-sensitivity as-
say. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2011;58:1332–1339.
 5. Boeddinghaus J, Nestelberger T, Twerenbold R, et al. Direct comparison of 
4 very early rule-out strategies for acute myocardial infarction using high-
sensitivity cardiac troponin I. Circulation. 2017;135:1597–1611.
 6. Chapman AR, Anand A, Boeddinghaus J, et al. Comparison of the efficacy 
and safety of early rule-out pathways for acute myocardial infarction. Circu-
lation. 2017;135:1586–1596.
 7 . de Lemos JA, Morrow DA, deFilippi CR. Highly sensitive troponin as-
says and the cardiology community: a love/hate relationship? Clin Chem. 
2011;57:826–829.
 8. Jaffe AS. Chasing troponin: how low can you go if you can see the rise? J 
Am Coll Cardiol. 2006;48:1763–1764.
 9. Jaffe AS, Apple FS, Morrow DA, et al. Being rational about (im)precision: a 
statement from the Biochemistry Subcommittee of the Joint European So-
ciety of Cardiology/American College of Cardiology Foundation/American 
Heart Association/World Heart Federation Task Force for the Definition of 
Myocardial Infarction. Clin Chem. 2010;56:941–943.
 10. Morrow DA, Cannon CP, Jesse RL, et al. National Academy of Clinical Bio-
chemistry laboratory medicine practice guidelines: clinical characteristics 
and utilization of biochemical markers in acute coronary syndromes. Circula-
tion. 2007;115:e356–e375.
 11. Mueller C, Giannitsis E, Christ M, et al. Multicenter evaluation of a 0-hour/1-
hour algorithm in the diagnosis of myocardial infarction with high-sensitivity 
cardiac troponin T. Ann Emerg Med. 2016;68:76–87 , e4.
 12. Odqvist M, Andersson PO, T ygesen H, et al. High-sensitivity troponins and 
outcomes after myocardial infarction. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2018;71:2616–
2624.
 13. Peacock WF, Baumann BM, Bruton D, et al. Efficacy of high-sensitivity tro-
ponin T in identifying very-low-risk patients with possible acute coronary 
syndrome. JAMA Cardiol. 2018;3:104–111.
 14. Reichlin T, Schindler C, Drexler B, et al. One-hour rule-out and rule-in of 
acute myocardial infarction using high-sensitivity cardiac troponin T. Arch 
Intern Med. 2012;172:1211–1218.
 15. Morrow DA. Clinician's guide to early rule-out strategies with high-sensitivity 
cardiac troponin. Circulation. 2017;135:1612–1616.
 16. Thygesen K, Alpert JS, Jaffe AS, et al. Fourth universal definition of myocar-
dial infarction (2018). Circulation. 2018;138:e618–e651.
 17 . Twerenbold R, Boeddinghaus J, Nestelberger T, et al. Clinical use of high-
sensitivity cardiac troponin in patients with suspected myocardial infarction. 
J Am Coll Cardiol. 2017;70:996–1012.
 18. Januzzi JL Jr, Mahler SA, Christenson RH, et al. Recommendations for in-
stitutions transitioning to high-sensitivity troponin testing: JACC Scientific 
Expert Panel. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2019;73:1059–1077 .
 19. Huis In 't Veld MA, Cullen L, Mahler SA, et al. The fast and the furious: 
low-risk chest pain and the rapid rule-out protocol. West J Emerg Med. 
2017;18:474–478.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on November 12, 2025

November 30, 2021 Circulation. 2021;144:e368–e454. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000001029 e428
Gulati et al 2021 Chest Pain GuidelineCLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINES 20. Schulman-Marcus J, Hartaigh BO, Gransar H, et al. Sex-specific associa-
tions between coronary artery plaque extent and risk of major adverse car-
diovascular events: the CONFIRM Long-Term Registry. J Am Coll Cardiol 
Img. 2016;9:364–372.
 21. Hadamitzky M, Freissmuth B, Meyer T, et al. Prognostic value of coronary 
computed tomographic angiography for prediction of cardiac events in 
patients with suspected coronary artery disease. J Am Coll Cardiol Img. 
2009;2:404–411.
 22. Finck T, Hardenberg J, Will A, et al. Ten-year follow-up after coronary com-
puted tomography angiography in patients with suspected coronary artery 
disease. J Am Coll Cardiol Img. 2019;12:1330–1338.
 23. Hochman JS, Reynolds HR, Bangalore S, et al. Baseline characteristics and 
risk profiles of participants in the ISCHEMIA randomized clinical trial. JAMA 
Cardiol. 2019;4:273–286.
 24. ISCHEMIA Trial Research Group, Maron DJ, Hochman JS, et al. Interna-
tional Study of Comparative Health Effectiveness with Medical and In-
vasive Approaches (ISCHEMIA) trial: rationale and design. Am Heart J. 
2018;201:124–135.
 25. Pickering JW, Than MP, Cullen L, et al. Rapid rule-out of acute myocardial 
infarction with a single high-sensitivity cardiac troponin T measurement 
nelow the limit of detection: a collaborative meta-analysis. Ann Intern Med. 
2017;166:715–724.
 26. McRae AD, Innes G, Graham M, et al. Undetectable concentrations of a 
Food and Drug Administration-approved high-sensitivity cardiac troponin T 
assay to rule out acute myocardial infarction at emergency department ar-
rival. Acad Emerg Med. 2017;24:1267–1277 .
 27 . Sandoval Y, Nowak R, deFilippi CR, et al. Myocardial infarction risk strati-
fication with a single measurement of high-sensitivity troponin I. J Am Coll 
Cardiol. 2019;74:271–282.
 28. Bularga A, Lee KK, Stewart S, et al. High-sensitivity troponin and the ap-
plication of risk stratification thresholds in patients with suspected acute 
coronary syndrome. Circulation. 2019;140:1557–1568.
 29. Chew DP, Lambrakis K, Blyth A, et al. A randomized trial of a 1-hour tro-
ponin T protocol in suspected acute coronary syndromes: the Rapid As-
sessment of Possible Acute Coronary Syndrome in the emergency de-
partment with high-sensitivity Troponin T Study (RAPID-TnT) Circulation. 
2019;140:1543–1556.
 30. Than M, Cullen L, Aldous S, et al. 2-Hour accelerated diagnostic protocol 
to assess patients with chest pain symptoms using contemporary troponins 
as the only biomarker: the ADAPT trial. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2012;59:2091–
2098.
 31. Mahler SA, Riley RF, Hiestand BC, et al. The HEART Pathway randomized 
trial: identifying emergency department patients with acute chest pain for 
early discharge. Circ Cardiovasc Qual Outcomes. 2015;8:195–203.
 32. Mark DG, Huang J, Chettipally U, et al. Performance of coronary risk scores 
among patients with chest pain in the emergency department. J Am Coll 
Cardiol. 2018;71:606–616.
 33. Stopyra JP, Miller CD, Hiestand BC, et al. Chest pain risk stratification: a 
comparison of the 2-Hour Accelerated Diagnostic Protocol (ADAPT) and 
the HEART pathway. Crit Pathw Cardiol. 2016;15:46–49.
 34. Stopyra JP, Miller CD, Hiestand BC, et al. Validation of the no objective 
testing rule and comparison to the HEART Pathway. Acad Emerg Med. 
2017;24:1165–1168.
 35. Stopyra JP, Riley RF, Hiestand BC, et al. The HEART Pathway randomized 
controlled trial one-year outcomes. Acad Emerg Med. 2019;26:41–50.
 36. Keller T, Zeller T, Peetz D, et al. Sensitive troponin I assay in early diagnosis 
of acute myocardial infarction. N Engl J Med. 2009;361:868–877 .
 37 . Neumann JT, Twerenbold R, Ojeda F, et al. Application of high-sen-
sitivity troponin in suspected myocardial infarction. N Engl J Med. 
2019;380:2529–2540.
 38. Roffi M, Patrono C, Collet JP, et al. 2015 ESC guidelines for the manage-
ment of acute coronary syndromes in patients presenting without per-
sistent ST-segment elevation: Task Force for the Management of Acute 
Coronary Syndromes in Patients Presenting Without Persistent ST-Seg-
ment Elevation of the European Society of Cardiology (ESC) Eur Heart J. 
2016;37:267–315.
 39. Thygesen K, Mair J, Giannitsis E, et al. How to use high-sensitivity cardiac 
troponins in acute cardiac care. Eur Heart J. 2012;33:2252–2257 .
 40. Cullen L, Mueller C, Parsonage WA, et al. Validation of high-sensitivity tro-
ponin I in a 2-hour diagnostic strategy to assess 30-day outcomes in emer-
gency department patients with possible acute coronary syndrome. J Am 
Coll Cardiol. 2013;62:1242–1249.
 41. Reichlin T, Twerenbold R, Wildi K, et al. Prospective validation of a 1-hour 
algorithm to rule-out and rule-in acute myocardial infarction using a high-
sensitivity cardiac troponin T assay. CMAJ. 2015;187:E243–E252. 42. Rubini Gimenez M, Twerenbold R, Jaeger C, et al. One-hour rule-in and rule-
out of acute myocardial infarction using high-sensitivity cardiac troponin I. 
Am J Med. 2015;128:861–870, e4.
 43. Twerenbold R, Neumann JT, Sorensen NA, et al. Prospective validation of 
the 0/1-h algorithm for early diagnosis of myocardial infarction. J Am Coll 
Cardiol. 2018;72:620–632.
 44. Than MP, Pickering JW, Aldous SJ, et al. Effectiveness of EDACS ver-
sus ADAPT accelerated diagnostic pathways for chest pain: a pragmatic 
randomized controlled trial embedded within practice. Ann Emerg Med. 
2016;68:93–102 e1.
 45. Than M, Aldous S, Lord SJ, et al. A 2-hour diagnostic protocol for possible 
cardiac chest pain in the emergency department: a randomized clinical trial. 
JAMA Intern Med. 2014;174:51–58.
 46. Collet JP, Thiele H, Barbato E, et al. 2020 ESC guidelines for the manage-
ment of acute coronary syndromes in patients presenting without persistent 
ST-segment elevation. Eur Heart J. 2021;42:1289–1367 .
 47 . Twerenbold R, Costabel JP, Nestelberger T, et al. Outcome of applying the 
ESC 0/1-hour algorithm in patients with suspected myocardial infarction. J 
Am Coll Cardiol. 2019;74:483–494.
 48. Backus BE, Six AJ, Kelder JC, et al. A prospective validation of the HEART 
score for chest pain patients at the emergency department. Int J Cardiol. 
2013;168:2153–2158.
 49. Fanaroff AC, Rymer JA, Goldstein SA, et al. Does this patient with chest pain 
have acute coronary syndrome?: the rational clinical examination systematic 
review. JAMA. 2015;314:1955–1965.
 50. McCord J, Cabrera R, Lindahl B, et al. Prognostic utility of a modified HEART 
score in chest pain patients in the emergency department. Circ Cardiovasc 
Qual Outcomes. 2017;10:e003101.
 51. Bank IEM, de Hoog VC, de Kleijn DPV, et al. Sex-based differences 
in the performance of the HEART score in patients presenting to the 
emergency department with acute chest pain. J Am Heart Assoc. 2017;6:  
e005373.
 52. Romero-Farina G, Candell-Riera J, Aguade-Bruix S, et al. Warranty 
periods for normal myocardial perfusion stress SPECT. J Nucl Cardiol. 
2015;22:44–54.
 53. Twerenbold R, Wildi K, Jaeger C, et al. Optimal cutoff levels of more 
sensitive cardiac troponin assays for the early diagnosis of myocar-
dial infarction in patients with renal dysfunction. Circulation. 2015;131: 
2041–2050.
 54. Wildi K, Nelles B, Twerenbold R, et al. Safety and efficacy of the 0 
h/3 h protocol for rapid rule out of myocardial infarction. Am Heart J. 
2016;181:16–25.
 55. Zhelev Z, Hyde C, Youngman E, et al. Diagnostic accuracy of single baseline 
measurement of Elecsys Troponin T high-sensitive assay for diagnosis of 
acute myocardial infarction in emergency department: systematic review 
and meta-analysis. BMJ. 2015;350:h15.
4.1.1. Low Risk Patients With Acute Chest Pain
 1. Bandstein N, Ljung R, Johansson M, et al. Undetectable high-sensitivity car-
diac troponin T level in the emergency department and risk of myocardial 
infarction. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2014;63:2569–2578.
 2. Chapman AR, Anand A, Boeddinghaus J, et al. Comparison of the efficacy 
and safety of early rule-out pathways for acute myocardial infarction. Circu-
lation. 2017;135:1586–1596.
 3. Mueller C, Giannitsis E, Christ M, et al. Multicenter evaluation of a 0-hour/1-
hour algorithm in the diagnosis of myocardial infarction with high-sensitivity 
cardiac troponin T. Ann Emerg Med. 2016;68:76–87 , e4.
 4. Reichlin T, Schindler C, Drexler B, et al. One-hour rule-out and rule-in of 
acute myocardial infarction using high-sensitivity cardiac troponin T. Arch 
Intern Med. 2012;172:1211–1218.
 5. Reichlin T, Twerenbold R, Wildi K, et al. Prospective validation of a 1-hour 
algorithm to rule-out and rule-in acute myocardial infarction using a high-
sensitivity cardiac troponin T assay. CMAJ. 2015;187:E243–E252.
 6. Rubini Gimenez M, Hoeller R, Reichlin T, et al. Rapid rule out of acute myo-
cardial infarction using undetectable levels of high-sensitivity cardiac tropo-
nin. Int J Cardiol. 2013;168:3896–3901.
 7 . Rubini Gimenez M, Twerenbold R, Jaeger C, et al. One-hour rule-in and rule-
out of acute myocardial infarction using high-sensitivity cardiac troponin I. 
Am J Med. 2015;128:861–870, e4.
 8. Twerenbold R, Neumann JT, Sorensen NA, et al. Prospective validation of 
the 0/1-h algorithm for early diagnosis of myocardial infarction. J Am Coll 
Cardiol. 2018;72:620–632.
 9. Pickering JW, Than MP, Cullen L, et al. Rapid rule-out of acute myocardial 
infarction with a single high-sensitivity cardiac troponin T measurement be-
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on November 12, 2025

Circulation. 2021;144:e368–e454. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000001029 November 30, 2021 e429
Gulati et al 2021 Chest Pain GuidelineCLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINESlow the limit of detection: a collaborative meta-analysis. Ann Intern Med. 
2017;166:715–724.
 10. Peacock WF, Baumann BM, Bruton D, et al. Efficacy of high-sensitivity tro-
ponin T in identifying very-low-risk patients with possible acute coronary 
syndrome. JAMA Cardiol. 2018;3:104–111.
 11. Neumann JT, Twerenbold R, Ojeda F, et al. Application of high-sen-
sitivity troponin in suspected myocardial infarction. N Engl J Med. 
2019;380:2529–2540.
 12. Greenslade JH, Carlton EW, Van Hise C, et al. Diagnostic accuracy of a new 
high-sensitivity troponin I assay and five accelerated diagnostic pathways 
for ruling out acute myocardial infarction and acute coronary syndrome. Ann 
Emerg Med. 2018;71:439–451, e3.
 13. Cullen L, Mueller C, Parsonage WA, et al. Validation of high-sensitivity tro-
ponin I in a 2-hour diagnostic strategy to assess 30-day outcomes in emer-
gency department patients with possible acute coronary syndrome. J Am 
Coll Cardiol. 2013;62:1242–1249.
 14. Flaws D, Than M, Scheuermeyer FX, et al. External validation of the emer-
gency department assessment of chest pain score accelerated diagnostic 
pathway (EDACS-ADP) Emerg Med J. 2016;33:618–625.
 15. Stopyra JP, Miller CD, Hiestand BC, et al. Validation of the no objective 
testing rule and comparison to the HEART Pathway. Acad Emerg Med. 
2017;24:1165–1168.
 16. Than M, Aldous S, Lord SJ, et al. A 2-hour diagnostic protocol for possible 
cardiac chest pain in the emergency department: a randomized clinical trial. 
JAMA Intern Med. 2014;174:51–58.
 17 . Twerenbold R, Boeddinghaus J, Nestelberger T, et al. Clinical use of high-
sensitivity cardiac troponin in patients with suspected myocardial infarction. 
J Am Coll Cardiol. 2017;70:996–1012.
 18. Mahler SA, Lenoir KM, Wells BJ, et al. Safely identifying emergency de-
partment patients with acute chest pain for early discharge. Circulation. 
2018;138:2456–2468.
 19. Amsterdam EA, Wenger NK, Brindis RG, et al. 2014 AHA/ACC guide-
line for the management of patients with non-ST-elevation acute coro-
nary syndromes: a report of the American College of Cardiology/Ameri-
can Heart Association Task Force on Practice Guidelines. Circulation. 
2014;130:e344–e426.
 20. Mahler SA, Riley RF, Hiestand BC, et al. The HEART Pathway randomized 
trial: identifying emergency department patients with acute chest pain for 
early discharge. Circ Cardiovasc Qual Outcomes. 2015;8:195–203.
 21. Than M, Cullen L, Aldous S, et al. 2-Hour accelerated diagnostic pro-
tocol to assess patients with chest pain symptoms using contemporary 
troponins as the only biomarker: the ADAPT trial. J Am Coll Cardiol. 
2012;59:2091–2098.
4.1.1.1. Cost-Value Considerations in the Evaluation 
of Low-Risk Patients
 1. Velickovic VM, Rochau U, Conrads-Frank A, et al. Systematic assessment 
of decision-analytic models evaluating diagnostic tests for acute myocardial 
infarction based on cardiac troponin assays. Expert Rev Pharmacoecon Out-
comes Res. 2018:1–22.
 2. Westwood M, van Asselt T, Ramaekers B, et al. High-sensitivity troponin 
assays for the early rule-out or diagnosis of acute myocardial infarction in 
people with acute chest pain: a systematic review and cost-effectiveness 
analysis. Health Technol Assess. 2015;19:1–234.
 3. Goodacre S, Thokala P, Carroll C, et al. Systematic review, meta-analysis and 
economic modelling of diagnostic strategies for suspected acute coronary 
syndrome. Health Technol Assess. 2013;17:v–vi, 1-188.
 4. Polanczyk CA, Kuntz KM, Sacks DB, et al. Emergency department triage 
strategies for acute chest pain using creatine kinase-MB and troponin I 
assays: a cost-effectiveness analysis. Ann Intern Med. 1999;131:909–918.
 5. Poldervaart JM, Reitsma JB, Backus BE, et al. Effect of using the 
HEART score in patients with chest pain in the emergency department: 
a stepped-wedge, cluster randomized trial. Ann Intern Med. 2017;166:  
689–697 .
 6. Riley RF, Miller CD, Russell GB, et al. Cost analysis of the History, ECG, Age, 
Risk factors, and initial Troponin (HEART) Pathway randomized control trial. 
Am J Emerg Med. 2017;35:77–81.
 7 . Parsonage WA, Milburn T, Ashover S, et al. Implementing change: evaluating 
the Accelerated Chest pain Risk Evaluation (ACRE) project. Med J Aust. 
2017;207:201–205.
 8. Julicher P, Greenslade JH, Parsonage WA, et al. The organisational value of 
diagnostic strategies using high-sensitivity troponin for patients with pos-
sible acute coronary syndromes: a trial-based cost-effectiveness analysis. 
BMJ Open. 2017;7:e013653. 9. Cheng Q, Greenslade JH, Parsonage WA, et al. Change to costs and 
lengths of stay in the emergency department and the Brisbane protocol: an 
observational study. BMJ Open. 2016;6:e009746.
 10. Roberts RR, Zalenski RJ, Mensah EK, et al. Costs of an emergency depart-
ment-based accelerated diagnostic protocol vs hospitalization in patients 
with chest pain: a randomized controlled trial. JAMA. 1997;278:1670–1676.
 11. Kip MMA, Koffijberg H, Moesker MJ, et al. The cost-utility of point-of-care 
troponin testing to diagnose acute coronary syndrome in primary care. BMC 
Cardiovasc Disord. 2017;17:213.
 12. Vaidya A, Severens JL, Bongaerts BW, et al. High-sensitive troponin T assay 
for the diagnosis of acute myocardial infarction: an economic evaluation. 
BMC Cardiovasc Disord. 2014;14:77 .
 13. Twerenbold R, Jaeger C, Rubini Gimenez M, et al. Impact of high-sensitivity 
cardiac troponin on use of coronary angiography, cardiac stress testing, and 
time to discharge in suspected acute myocardial infarction. Eur Heart J. 
2016;37:3324–3332.
4.1.2. Intermediate-Risk Patients With Acute  
Chest Pain
 1. Farkouh ME, Smars PA, Reeder GS, et al. A clinical trial of a chest-pain 
observation unit for patients with unstable angina. Chest Pain Evalua-
tion in the Emergency Room (CHEER) Investigators. N Engl J Med. 
1998;339:1882–1888.
 2. Miller CD, Hwang W, Hoekstra JW, et al. Stress cardiac magnetic resonance 
imaging with observation unit care reduces cost for patients with emergent 
chest pain: a randomized trial. Ann Emerg Med. 2010;201056:209–219.
 3. Roberts RR, Zalenski RJ, Mensah EK, et al. Costs of an emergency  
department-based accelerated diagnostic protocol vs hospitalization in 
patients with chest pain: a randomized controlled trial. JAMA. 1997;278: 
1670–1676.
 4. Ross MA, Hockenberry JM, Mutter R, et al. Protocol-driven emergency de-
partment observation units offer savings, shorter stays, and reduced admis-
sions. Health Aff (Millwood). 2013;32:2149–2156.
 5. Rydman RJ, Zalenski RJ, Roberts RR, et al. Patient satisfaction with an 
emergency department chest pain observation unit. Ann Emerg Med. 
1997;29:109–115.
 6. Miller CD, Hwang W, Case D, et al. Stress CMR imaging observation unit in 
the emergency department reduces 1-year medical care costs in patients 
with acute chest pain: a randomized study for comparison with inpatient 
care. J Am Coll Cardiol Img. 2011;4:862–870.
 7 . Hockenberry JM, Mutter R, Barrett M, et al. Factors associated with pro-
longed observation services stays and the impact of long stays on patient 
cost. Health Serv Res. 2014;49:893–909.
 8. Labovitz AJ, Noble VE, Bierig M, et al. Focused cardiac ultrasound in the 
emergent setting: a consensus statement of the American Society of Echo-
cardiography and American College of Emergency Physicians. J Am Soc 
Echocardiogr. 2010;23:1225–1230.
 9. Roffi M, Patrono C, Collet JP, et al. 2015 ESC guidelines for the man-
agement of acute coronary syndromes in patients presenting without 
persistent ST-segment elevation: Task Force for the Management of 
Acute Coronary Syndromes in Patients Presenting Without Persistent 
ST-Segment Elevation of the European Society of Cardiology (ESC) Eur 
Heart J. 2016;37:267–315.
 10. Amsterdam EA, Wenger NK, Brindis RG, et al. 2014 AHA/ACC guide-
line for the management of patients with non-ST-elevation acute coro-
nary syndromes: a report of the American College of Cardiology/Ameri-
can Heart Association Task Force on Practice Guidelines. Circulation. 
2014;130:e344–e426.
 11. Douglas PS, Garcia MJ, Haines D, et al. ACCF/ASE/AHA/ASNC/HFSA/
HRS/SCAI/SCCM/SCCT/SCMR 2011 appropriate use criteria for echo-
cardiography: a report of the American College of Cardiology Foundation 
Appropriate Use Criteria Task Force, American Society of Echocardiogra-
phy, American Heart Association, American Society of Nuclear Cardiology, 
Heart Failure Society of America, Heart Rhythm Society, Society for Cardio-
vascular Angiography and Interventions, Society of Critical Care Medicine, 
Society of Cardiovascular Computed Tomography, and Society for Cardio-
vascular Magnetic Resonance. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2011;57:1126–1166.
 12. Sicari R, Nihoyannopoulos P, Evangelista A, et al. Stress echocardiography 
expert consensus statement—executive summary: European Association 
of Echocardiography (EAE) (a registered branch of the ESC) Eur Heart J. 
2009;30:278–289.
 13. Health Quality O. Stress echocardiography for the diagnosis of coronary 
artery disease: an evidence-based analysis. Ont Health Technol Assess Ser. 
2010;10:1–61.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on November 12, 2025

November 30, 2021 Circulation. 2021;144:e368–e454. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000001029 e430
Gulati et al 2021 Chest Pain GuidelineCLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINES4.1.2.1. Intermediate-Risk Patients With Acute Chest 
Pain and No Known CAD
 1. Goldstein JA, Chinnaiyan KM, Abidov A, et al. The CT-STAT (Coronary Com-
puted Tomographic Angiography for Systematic Triage of Acute Chest Pain 
Patients to Treatment) trial. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2011;58:1414–1422.
 2. Litt HI, Gatsonis C, Snyder B, et al. CT angiography for safe discharge 
of patients with possible acute coronary syndromes. N Engl J Med. 
2012;366:1393–1403.
 3. Goodacre S, Thokala P, Carroll C, et al. Systematic review, meta-analysis and 
economic modelling of diagnostic strategies for suspected acute coronary 
syndrome. Health Technol Assess. 2013;17:v–vi; 1–188.
 4. Goldstein JA, Gallagher MJ, O'Neill WW, et al. A randomized controlled trial 
of multi-slice coronary computed tomography for evaluation of acute chest 
pain. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2007;49:863–871.
 5. Chang SA, Choi SI, Choi EK, et al. Usefulness of 64-slice multidetector 
computed tomography as an initial diagnostic approach in patients with 
acute chest pain. Am Heart J. 2008;156:375–383.
 6. Miller AH, Pepe PE, Peshock R, et al. Is coronary computed tomography 
angiography a resource sparing strategy in the risk stratification and evalu-
ation of acute chest pain? Results of a randomized controlled trial. Acad 
Emerg Med. 2011;18:458–467 .
 7 . Hoffmann U, Truong QA, Schoenfeld DA, et al. Coronary CT angiog-
raphy versus standard evaluation in acute chest pain. N Engl J Med. 
2012;367:299–308.
 8. Linde JJ, Kofoed KF, Sorgaard M, et al. Cardiac computed tomography 
guided treatment strategy in patients with recent acute-onset chest pain: 
results from the randomised, controlled trial: CArdiac cT in the treatment of 
acute CHest pain (CATCH) Int J Cardiol. 2013;168:5257–5262.
 9. Hamilton-Craig C, Fifoot A, Hansen M, et al. Diagnostic performance and 
cost of CT angiography versus stress ECG—a randomized prospective study 
of suspected acute coronary syndrome chest pain in the emergency depart-
ment (CT-COMPARE) Int J Cardiol. 2014;177:867–873.
 10. Levsky JM, Spevack DM, Travin MI, et al. Coronary computed tomography 
angiography versus radionuclide myocardial perfusion imaging in patients 
with chest pain admitted to telemetry: a randomized trial. Ann Intern Med. 
2015;163:174–183.
 11. Dedic A, Lubbers MM, Schaap J, et al. Coronary CT angiography for sus-
pected ACS in the era of high-sensitivity troponins: randomized multicenter 
study. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2016;67:16–26.
 12. Hoffmann U, Ferencik M, Udelson JE, et al. Prognostic value of noninvasive 
cardiovascular testing in patients with stable chest pain: insights from the 
PROMISE trial (Prospective Multicenter Imaging Study for Evaluation of 
Chest Pain) Circulation. 2017;135:2320–2332.
 13. Min JK, Dunning A, Lin FY, et al. Age- and sex-related differences in all-
cause mortality risk based on coronary computed tomography angiography 
findings results from the International Multicenter CONFIRM (Coronary CT 
Angiography Evaluation for Clinical Outcomes: An International Multicenter 
Registry) of 23 854 patients without known coronary artery disease. J Am 
Coll Cardiol. 2011;58:849–860.
 14. Blankstein R, Ahmed W, Bamberg F, et al. Comparison of exercise treadmill 
testing with cardiac computed tomography angiography among patients 
presenting to the emergency room with chest pain: the Rule Out Myocardial 
Infarction Using Computer-Assisted Tomography (ROMICAT) study. Circ 
Cardiovasc Imaging. 2012;5:233–242.
 15. Jeetley P, Burden L, Stoykova B, et al. Clinical and economic impact of 
stress echocardiography compared with exercise electrocardiography in 
patients with suspected acute coronary syndrome but negative troponin: a 
prospective randomized controlled study. Eur Heart J. 2007;28:204–211.
 16. Dadkhah S, Almuwaqqat Z, Sulaiman S, et al. Sensitive troponin I and stress 
testing in the emergency department for the early management of chest 
pain using 2-hour protocol. Crit Pathw Cardiol. 2017;16:89–92.
 17 . Nucifora G, Badano LP, Sarraf-Zadegan N, et al. Comparison of early dobu-
tamine stress echocardiography and exercise electrocardiographic testing 
for management of patients presenting to the emergency department with 
chest pain. Am J Cardiol. 2007;100:1068–1073.
 18. Jasani G, Papas M, Patel AJ, et al. Immediate stress echocardiography for 
low-risk chest pain patients in the emergency department: a prospective 
observational cohort study. J Emerg Med. 2018;54:156–164.
 19. Krishnan S, Venn R, Blumenthal DM, et al. Utilization of stress testing for 
low-risk patients with chest discomfort in the emergency department. J Nucl 
Cardiol. 2019;26:1642–1646.
 20. Hermann LK, Newman DH, Pleasant WA, et al. Yield of routine provocative 
cardiac testing among patients in an emergency department-based chest 
pain unit. JAMA Intern Med. 2013;173:1128–1133. 21. Diercks DB, Mumma BE, Frank Peacock W, et al. Incremental value of  
objective cardiac testing in addition to physician impression and serial con-
temporary troponin measurements in women. Acad Emerg Med. 2013;2 
0:265–270.
 22. Poldervaart JM, Six AJ, Backus BE, et al. The predictive value of the exer-
cise ECG for major adverse cardiac events in patients who presented with 
chest pain in the emergency department. Clin Res Cardiol. 2013;102:305–
312.
 23. Napoli AM, Tran S, Wang J. Low-risk chest pain patients younger than 40 
years do not benefit from admission and stress testing. Crit Pathw Cardiol. 
2013;12:201–203.
 24. Scott AC, Bilesky J, Lamanna A, et al. Limited utility of exercise stress test-
ing in the evaluation of suspected acute coronary syndrome in patients 
aged less than 40 years with intermediate risk features. Emerg Med Austra-
las. 2014;26:170–176.
 25. Aldous S, Richards AM, Cullen L, et al. The incremental value of stress test-
ing in patients with acute chest pain beyond serial cardiac troponin testing. 
Emerg Med J. 2016;33:319–324.
 26. Greenslade JH, Parsonage W, Ho A, et al. Utility of routine exercise stress 
testing among intermediate risk chest pain patients attending an emergen-
cy department. Heart Lung Circ. 2015;24:879–884.
 27 . Skoien W. Diagnostic Yield of Routine Stress Testing in low and intermedi-
ate risk chest pain patients under 40 years: a systematic review. Crit Pathw 
Cardiol. 2016;15:114–120.
 28. Amsterdam EA, Wenger NK, Brindis RG, et al. 2014 AHA/ACC guideline for 
the management of patients with non-ST-elevation acute coronary syndromes: 
a report of the American College of Cardiology/American Heart Association 
Task Force on Practice Guidelines. Circulation. 2014;130:e344–e426.
 29. Levsky JM, Haramati LB, Spevack DM, et al. Coronary computed tomog-
raphy angiography versus stress echocardiography in acute chest pain: a 
randomized controlled trial. J Am Coll Cardiol Img. 2018;11:1288–1297 .
 30. Heitner JF, Klem I, Rasheed D, et al. Stress cardiac MR imaging compared 
with stress echocardiography in the early evaluation of patients who present 
to the emergency department with intermediate-risk chest pain. Radiology. 
2014;271:56–64.
 31. Udelson JE, Beshansky JR, Ballin DS, et al. Myocardial perfusion imaging 
for evaluation and triage of patients with suspected acute cardiac ischemia: 
a randomized controlled trial. JAMA. 2002;288:2693–2700.
 32. Miller CD, Case LD, Little WC, et al. Stress CMR reduces revascularization, 
hospital readmission, and recurrent cardiac testing in intermediate-risk pa-
tients with acute chest pain. J Am Coll Cardiol Img. 2013;6:785–794.
 33. Miller CD, Hwang W, Case D, et al. Stress CMR imaging observation unit in 
the emergency department reduces 1-year medical care costs in patients 
with acute chest pain: a randomized study for comparison with inpatient 
care. J Am Coll Cardiol Img. 2011;4:862–870.
 34. Miller CD, Hwang W, Hoekstra JW, et al. Stress cardiac magnetic resonance 
imaging with observation unit care reduces cost for patients with emergent 
chest pain: a randomized trial. Ann Emerg Med. 2010;201056:209–219.
 35. Ingkanisorn WP, Kwong RY, Bohme NS, et al. Prognosis of negative ad-
enosine stress magnetic resonance in patients presenting to an emergency 
department with chest pain. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2006;47:1427–1432.
 36. Siontis GC, Mavridis D, Greenwood JP, et al. Outcomes of non-invasive diag-
nostic modalities for the detection of coronary artery disease: network meta-
analysis of diagnostic randomised controlled trials. BMJ. 2018;360:k504.
 37 . Norgaard BL, Leipsic J, Gaur S, et al. Diagnostic performance of noninva-
sive fractional flow reserve derived from coronary computed tomography 
angiography in suspected coronary artery disease: the NXT trial (Analysis of 
Coronary Blood Flow Using CT Angiography: Next Steps) J Am Coll Cardiol. 
2014;63:1145–1155.
 38. Sand NPR, Veien KT, Nielsen SS, et al. Prospective comparison of FFR 
derived from coronary ct angiography with SPECT perfusion imaging in 
stable coronary artery disease: the ReASSESS study. J Am Coll Cardiol Img. 
2018;11:1640–1650.
 39. Patel MR, Norgaard BL, Fairbairn TA, et al. 1-Y ear impact on medical prac-
tice and clinical outcomes of FFRCT: the ADVANCE registry. J Am Coll 
Cardiol Img. 2020;13:97–105.
 40. Fairbairn TA, Nieman K, Akasaka T, et al. Real-world clinical utility and im-
pact on clinical decision-making of coronary computed tomography angiog-
raphy-derived fractional flow reserve: lessons from the ADVANCE Registry. 
Eur Heart J. 2018;39:3701–3711.
 41. Nakanishi R, Osawa K, Ceponiene I, et al. The diagnostic performance 
of SPECT-MPI to predict functional significant coronary artery dis-
ease by fractional flow reserve derived from CCTA (FFRCT): sub-anal-
ysis from ACCURACY and VCT001 studies. Int J Cardiovasc Imaging. 
2017;33:2067–2072.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on November 12, 2025

Circulation. 2021;144:e368–e454. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000001029 November 30, 2021 e431
Gulati et al 2021 Chest Pain GuidelineCLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINES 42. Chinnaiyan KM, Safian RD, Gallagher ML, et al. Clinical use of CT-derived 
fractional flow reserve in the emergency department. J Am Coll Cardiol Img. 
2020;13:452–461.
 43. Ferencik M, Lu MT, Mayrhofer T, et al. Non-invasive fractional flow reserve 
derived from coronary computed tomography angiography in patients with 
acute chest pain: subgroup analysis of the ROMICAT II trial. J Cardiovasc 
Comput Tomogr. 2019;13:196–202.
 44. Schulman-Marcus J, Hartaigh BO, Gransar H, et al. Sex-specific associa-
tions between coronary artery plaque extent and risk of major adverse car-
diovascular events: the CONFIRM long-term registry. J Am Coll Cardiol Img. 
2016;9:364–372.
 45. Hadamitzky M, Freissmuth B, Meyer T, et al. Prognostic value of coronary 
computed tomographic angiography for prediction of cardiac events in 
patients with suspected coronary artery disease. J Am Coll Cardiol Img. 
2009;2:404–411.
 46. Finck T, Hardenberg J, Will A, et al. Ten-year follow-up after coronary com-
puted tomography angiography in patients with suspected coronary artery 
disease. J Am Coll Cardiol Img. 2019;12:1330–1338.
 47 . Hulten E, Pickett C, Bittencourt MS, et al. Outcomes after coronary com-
puted tomography angiography in the emergency department: a systematic 
review and meta-analysis of randomized, controlled trials. J Am Coll Cardiol. 
2013;61:880–892.
 48. Linde JJ, Hove JD, Sorgaard M, et al. Long-term clinical impact of coro-
nary CT angiography in patients with recent acute-onset chest pain: 
the randomized controlled CATCH trial. J Am Coll Cardiol Img. 2015;8: 
1404–1413.
 49. Hulten E, Pickett C, Bittencourt MS, et al. Meta-analysis of coronary CT 
angiography in the emergency department. Eur Heart J Cardiovasc Imaging. 
2013;14:607 .
 50. D'Ascenzo F, Cerrato E, Biondi-Zoccai G, et al. Coronary computed  
tomographic angiography for detection of coronary artery disease in pa-
tients presenting to the emergency department with chest pain: a me-
ta-analysis of randomized clinical trials. Eur Heart J Cardiovasc Imaging. 
2013;14:782–789.
 51. Hachamovitch R, Nutter B, Hlatky MA, et al. Patient management after non-
invasive cardiac imaging results from SPARC (Study of myocardial perfu-
sion and coronary anatomy imaging roles in coronary artery disease) J Am 
Coll Cardiol. 2012;59:462–474.
 52. Shaw LJ, Berman DS, Picard MH, et al. Comparative definitions for mod-
erate-severe ischemia in stress nuclear, echocardiography, and magnetic 
resonance imaging. J Am Coll Cardiol Img. 2014;7:593–604.
 53. Fihn SD, Gardin JM, Abrams J, et al. 2012 ACCF/AHA/ACP/AATS/
PCNA/SCAI/STS guideline for the diagnosis and management of patients 
with stable ischemic heart disease: a report of the American College of 
Cardiology Foundation/American Heart Association Task Force on Practice 
Guidelines, and the American College of Physicians, American Association 
for Thoracic Surgery, Preventive Cardiovascular Nurses Association, Society 
for Cardiovascular Angiography and Interventions, and Society of Thoracic 
Surgeons. Circulation. 2012;126:e354–e471.
 54. Roffi M, Patrono C, Collet JP, et al. 2015 ESC Guidelines for the manage-
ment of acute coronary syndromes in patients presenting without per-
sistent ST-segment elevation: Task Force for the Management of Acute 
Coronary Syndromes in Patients Presenting without Persistent ST-Seg-
ment Elevation of the European Society of Cardiology (ESC) Eur Heart J. 
2016;37:267–315.
 55. Khan A, Engineer R, Wang S, et al. Initial experience regarding the safety 
and yield of rest-stress myocardial perfusion imaging in emergency depart-
ment patients with mildly abnormal high-sensitivity cardiac troponins. J Nucl 
Cardiol. 202010.1007/s12350-020-02145-w.
4.1.2.1.1. Cost-Value Considerations
 1. Jasani G, Papas M, Patel AJ, et al. Immediate stress echocardiography for 
low-risk chest pain patients in the emergency department: a prospective 
observational cohort study. J Emerg Med. 2018;54:156–164.
 2. Davies R, Liu G, Sciamanna C, et al. Comparison of the effectiveness of 
stress echocardiography versus myocardial perfusion imaging in patients 
presenting to the emergency department with low-risk chest pain. Am J 
Cardiol. 2016;118:1786–1791.
 3. Levsky JM, Haramati LB, Spevack DM, et al. Coronary computed tomog-
raphy angiography versus stress echocardiography in acute chest pain: a 
randomized controlled trial. J Am Coll Cardiol Img. 2018;11:1288–1297 .
 4. Goldstein JA, Chinnaiyan KM, Abidov A, et al. The CT-STAT (Coronary Com-
puted Tomographic Angiography for Systematic Triage of Acute Chest Pain 
Patients to Treatment) trial. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2011;58:1414–1422. 5. Litt HI, Gatsonis C, Snyder B, et al. CT angiography for safe discharge 
of patients with possible acute coronary syndromes. N Engl J Med. 
2012;366:1393–1403.
 6. Hoffmann U, Truong QA, Schoenfeld DA, et al. Coronary CT angiog-
raphy versus standard evaluation in acute chest pain. N Engl J Med. 
2012;367:299–308.
 7 . Hulten E, Pickett C, Bittencourt MS, et al. Outcomes after coronary com-
puted tomography angiography in the emergency department: a systematic 
review and meta-analysis of randomized, controlled trials. J Am Coll Cardiol. 
2013;61:880–892.
 8. D'Ascenzo F, Cerrato E, Biondi-Zoccai G, et al. Coronary computed to-
mographic angiography for detection of coronary artery disease in pa-
tients presenting to the emergency department with chest pain: a me-
ta-analysis of randomized clinical trials. Eur Heart J Cardiovasc Imaging. 
2013;14:782–789.
4.1.2.2. Intermediate-Risk Patients With Acute Chest 
Pain and Known CAD
 1. Boden WE, O'Rourke RA, Teo KK, et al. Optimal medical therapy with or 
without PCI for stable coronary disease. N Engl J Med. 2007;356:1503–
1516.
 2. Maron DJ, Hochman JS, Reynolds HR, et al. Initial invasive or conservative 
strategy for stable coronary disease. N Engl J Med. 2020;382:1395–1407 .
 3. Hoffmann U, Truong QA, Schoenfeld DA, et al. Coronary CT angiog-
raphy versus standard evaluation in acute chest pain. N Engl J Med. 
2012;367:299–308.
 4. Goldstein JA, Chinnaiyan KM, Abidov A, et al. The CT-STAT (Coronary Com-
puted Tomographic Angiography for Systematic Triage of Acute Chest Pain 
Patients to Treatment) trial. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2011;58:1414–1422.
 5. Litt HI, Gatsonis C, Snyder B, et al. CT angiography for safe discharge 
of patients with possible acute coronary syndromes. N Engl J Med. 
2012;366:1393–1403.
 6. Hulten E, Pickett C, Bittencourt MS, et al. Outcomes after coronary com-
puted tomography angiography in the emergency department: a systematic 
review and meta-analysis of randomized, controlled trials. J Am Coll Cardiol. 
2013;61:880–892.
 7 . Goodacre S, Thokala P, Carroll C, et al. Systematic review, meta-analysis and 
economic modelling of diagnostic strategies for suspected acute coronary 
syndrome. Health Technol Assess. 2013;17:v–vi; 1–188.
 8. Hulten E, Pickett C, Bittencourt MS, et al. Meta-analysis of coronary CT 
angiography in the emergency department. Eur Heart J Cardiovasc Imaging. 
2013;14:607 .
 9. Puchner SB, Liu T, Mayrhofer T, et al. High-risk plaque detected on coronary 
CT angiography predicts acute coronary syndromes independent of signifi-
cant stenosis in acute chest pain: results from the ROMICAT-II trial. J Am 
Coll Cardiol. 2014;64:684–692.
 10. Motoyama S, Ito H, Sarai M, et al. Plaque characterization by coronary com-
puted tomography angiography and the likelihood of acute coronary events 
in mid-term follow-up. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2015;66:337–346.
 11. Chang HJ, Lin FY, Lee SE, et al. Coronary atherosclerotic precursors of 
acute coronary syndromes. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2018;71:2511–2522.
 12. Douglas PS, Pontone G, Hlatky MA, et al. Clinical outcomes of fractional 
flow reserve by computed tomographic angiography-guided diagnostic 
strategies vs. usual care in patients with suspected coronary artery disease: 
the prospective longitudinal trial of FFR(CT): outcome and resource impacts 
study. Eur Heart J. 2015;36:3359–3367 .
 13. Norgaard BL, Leipsic J, Gaur S, et al. Diagnostic performance of noninva-
sive fractional flow reserve derived from coronary computed tomography 
angiography in suspected coronary artery disease: the NXT trial (Analysis of 
Coronary Blood Flow Using CT Angiography: Next Steps). J Am Coll Cardiol. 
2014;63:1145–1155.
 14. Patel MR, Norgaard BL, Fairbairn TA, et al. 1-Y ear impact on medical prac-
tice and clinical outcomes of FFRCT: the ADVANCE registry. J Am Coll 
Cardiol Img. 2020;13:97–105.
 15. Fairbairn TA, Nieman K, Akasaka T, et al. Real-world clinical utility and im-
pact on clinical decision-making of coronary computed tomography angiog-
raphy-derived fractional flow reserve: lessons from the ADVANCE Registry. 
Eur Heart J. 2018;39:3701–3711.
 16. Chinnaiyan KM, Safian RD, Gallagher ML, et al. Clinical use of CT-derived 
fractional flow reserve in the emergency department. J Am Coll Cardiol Img. 
2020;13:452–461.
 17 . Ferencik M, Lu MT, Mayrhofer T, et al. Non-invasive fractional flow reserve 
derived from coronary computed tomography angiography in patients with 
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on November 12, 2025

November 30, 2021 Circulation. 2021;144:e368–e454. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000001029 e432
Gulati et al 2021 Chest Pain GuidelineCLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINESacute chest pain: subgroup analysis of the ROMICAT II trial. J Cardiovasc 
Comput Tomogr. 2019;13:196–202.
 18. Udelson JE, Beshansky JR, Ballin DS, et al. Myocardial perfusion imaging 
for evaluation and triage of patients with suspected acute cardiac ischemia: 
a randomized controlled trial. JAMA. 2002;288:2693–2700.
 19. Nucifora G, Badano LP, Sarraf-Zadegan N, et al. Comparison of early dobu-
tamine stress echocardiography and exercise electrocardiographic testing 
for management of patients presenting to the emergency department with 
chest pain. Am J Cardiol. 2007;100:1068–1073.
 20. Linde JJ, Kofoed KF, Sorgaard M, et al. Cardiac computed tomography 
guided treatment strategy in patients with recent acute-onset chest pain: 
results from the randomised, controlled trial: CArdiac cT in the treatment of 
acute CHest pain (CATCH) Int J Cardiol. 2013;168:5257–5262.
 21. Blankstein R, Ahmed W, Bamberg F, et al. Comparison of exercise treadmill 
testing with cardiac computed tomography angiography among patients 
presenting to the emergency room with chest pain: the Rule Out Myocardial 
Infarction Using Computer-Assisted Tomography (ROMICAT) study. Circ 
Cardiovasc Imaging. 2012;5:233–242.
 22. Shaw LJ, Berman DS, Maron DJ, et al. Optimal medical therapy with or 
without percutaneous coronary intervention to reduce ischemic burden: 
results from the Clinical Outcomes Utilizing Revascularization and Ag-
gressive Drug Evaluation (COURAGE) trial nuclear substudy. Circulation. 
2008;117:1283–1291.
 23. Boden WE, O'Rourke RA, Crawford MH, et al. Outcomes in patients with 
acute non-Q-wave myocardial infarction randomly assigned to an invasive 
as compared with a conservative management strategy. Veterans Affairs 
Non-Q-Wave Infarction Strategies in Hospital (VANQWISH) Trial Investiga-
tors. N Engl J Med. 1998;338:1785–1792.
 24. Lee SE, Chang HJ, Sung JM, et al. Effects of statins on coronary ath-
erosclerotic plaques: the PARADIGM study. J Am Coll Cardiol Img. 
2018;11:1475–1484.
 25. Sand NPR, Veien KT, Nielsen SS, et al. Prospective comparison of FFR 
derived from coronary ct angiography with SPECT perfusion imaging in 
stable coronary artery disease: the ReASSESS study. J Am Coll Cardiol Img. 
2018;11:1640–1650.
 26. Fihn SD, Gardin JM, Abrams J, et al. 2012 ACCF/AHA/ACP/AATS/
PCNA/SCAI/STS guideline for the diagnosis and management of patients 
with stable ischemic heart disease: a report of the American College of 
Cardiology Foundation/American Heart Association Task Force on Practice 
Guidelines, and the American College of Physicians, American Association 
for Thoracic Surgery, Preventive Cardiovascular Nurses Association, Society 
for Cardiovascular Angiography and Interventions, and Society of Thoracic 
Surgeons. Circulation. 2012;126:e354–e471.
4.1.3. High-Risk Patients With Acute Chest Pain
 1. Mahmarian JJ, Shaw LJ, Filipchuk NG, et al. A multinational study to es-
tablish the value of early adenosine technetium-99m sestamibi myocardial 
perfusion imaging in identifying a low-risk group for early hospital discharge 
after acute myocardial infarction. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2006;48:2448–2457 .
 2. Mahmarian JJ, Dakik HA, Filipchuk NG, et al. An initial strategy of intensive 
medical therapy is comparable to that of coronary revascularization for sup-
pression of scintigraphic ischemia in high-risk but stable survivors of acute 
myocardial infarction. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2006;48:2458–2467 .
 3. Yan AT, Yan RT, Tan M, et al. Risk scores for risk stratification in acute coro-
nary syndromes: useful but simpler is not necessarily better. Eur Heart J. 
2007;28:1072–1078.
 4. Amsterdam EA, Wenger NK, Brindis RG, et al. 2014 AHA/ACC guide-
line for the management of patients with non-ST-elevation acute coro-
nary syndromes: a report of the American College of Cardiology/Ameri-
can Heart Association Task Force on Practice Guidelines. Circulation. 
2014;130:e344–e426.
 5. Patel MR, Calhoon JH, Dehmer GJ, et al. ACC/AATS/AHA/ASE/ASNC/
SCAI/SCCT/STS 2017 appropriate use criteria for coronary revasculariza-
tion in patients with stable ischemic heart disease: a report of the American 
College of Cardiology Appropriate Use Criteria Task Force, American Asso-
ciation for Thoracic Surgery, American Heart Association, American Society 
of Echocardiography, American Society of Nuclear Cardiology, Society for 
Cardiovascular Angiography and Interventions, Society of Cardiovascular 
Computed Tomography, and Society of Thoracic Surgeons. J Am Coll Car-
diol. 2017;69:2212–2241.
 6. Patel MR, Bailey SR, Bonow RO, et al. ACCF/SCAI/AATS/AHA/ASE/
ASNC/HFSA/HRS/SCCM/SCCT/SCMR/STS 2012 appropriate use 
criteria for diagnostic catheterization: a report of the American College of 
Cardiology Foundation Appropriate Use Criteria Task Force, Society for Cardiovascular Angiography and Interventions, American Association for 
Thoracic Surgery, American Heart Association, American Society of Echo-
cardiography, American Society of Nuclear Cardiology, Heart Failure Society 
of America, Heart Rhythm Society, Society of Critical Care Medicine, So-
ciety of Cardiovascular Computed Tomography, Society for Cardiovascular 
Magnetic Resonance, and Society of Thoracic Surgeons. J Am Coll Cardiol. 
2012;59:1995–2027 .
 7 . Levine GN, Bates ER, Blankenship JC, et al. 2015 ACC/AHA/SCAI fo-
cused update on primary percutaneous coronary intervention for patients 
with STelevation myocardial infarction: an update of the 2011 ACCF/
AHA/SCAI guideline for percutaneous coronary intervention and the 2013 
ACCF/AHA guideline for the management of ST-Elevation myocardial in-
farction. Circulation. 2016;133:1135–1147 .
 8. Pathik B, Raman B, Mohd Amin NH, et al. Troponin-positive chest pain 
with unobstructed coronary arteries: incremental diagnostic value of car-
diovascular magnetic resonance imaging. Eur Heart J Cardiovasc Imaging. 
2016;17:1146–1152.
 9. Dastidar AG, Rodrigues JCL, Johnson TW, et al. Myocardial infarction with 
nonobstructed coronary arteries: impact of CMR early after presentation. J 
Am Coll Cardiol Img. 2017;10:1204–1206.
 10. Assomull RG, Lyne JC, Keenan N, et al. The role of cardiovascular magnetic 
resonance in patients presenting with chest pain, raised troponin, and unob-
structed coronary arteries. Eur Heart J. 2007;28:1242–1249.
 11. Tornvall P, Gerbaud E, Behaghel A, et al. Myocarditis or "true" infarction by 
cardiac magnetic resonance in patients with a clinical diagnosis of myo-
cardial infarction without obstructive coronary disease: a meta-analysis of 
individual patient data. Atherosclerosis. 2015;241:87–91.
 12. Dastidar AG, Baritussio A, De Garate E, et al. Prognostic role of CMR and 
conventional risk factors in myocardial infarction with nonobstructed coro-
nary arteries. J Am Coll Cardiol Img. 2019;12:1973–1982.
 13. Greenslade JH, Carlton EW, Van Hise C, et al. Diagnostic accuracy of a new 
high-sensitivity troponin I assay and five accelerated diagnostic pathways 
for ruling out acute myocardial infarction and acute coronary syndrome. Ann 
Emerg Med. 2018;71:439–451, e3.
 14. Raff GL, Hoffmann U, Udelson JE. Trials of imaging use in the emergency 
department for acute chest pain. J Am Coll Cardiol Img. 2017;10:338–349.
 15. Cohen M. High-risk acute coronary syndrome patients with non-ST-eleva-
tion myocardial infarction: definition and treatment. Cardiovasc Drugs Ther. 
2008;22:407–418.
 16. Steg PG, FitzGerald G, Fox KA. Risk stratification in non-ST-segment eleva-
tion acute coronary syndromes: troponin alone is not enough. Am J Med. 
2009;122:107–108.
 17 . Pasupathy S, Air T, Dreyer RP, et al. Systematic review of patients present-
ing with suspected myocardial infarction and nonobstructive coronary arter-
ies. Circulation. 2015;131:861–870.
 18. Dastidar AG, Rodrigues JC, Ahmed N, et al. The role of cardiac MRI in pa-
tients with troponin-positive chest pain and unobstructed coronary arteries. 
Curr Cardiovasc Imaging Rep. 2015;8:28.
 19. Niccoli G, Scalone G, Crea F. Acute myocardial infarction with no obstruc-
tive coronary atherosclerosis: mechanisms and management. Eur Heart J. 
2015;36:475–481.
4.1.4. Acute Chest Pain in Patients With Prior 
Coronary Artery Bypass Graft (CABG) Surgery
 1. Fitzgibbon GM, Kafka HP, Leach AJ, et al. Coronary bypass graft fate and 
patient outcome: angiographic follow-up of 5 065 grafts related to sur-
vival and reoperation in 1 388 patients during 25 years. J Am Coll Cardiol. 
1996;28:616–626.
 2. Harskamp RE, Lopes RD, Baisden CE, et al. Saphenous vein graft failure 
after coronary artery bypass surgery: pathophysiology, management, and 
future directions. Ann Surg. 2013;257:824–833.
 3. Wolk MJ, Bailey SR, Doherty JU, et al. ACCF/AHA/ASE/ASNC/HFSA/
HRS/SCAI/SCCT/SCMR/STS 2013 multimodality appropriate use criteria 
for the detection and risk assessment of stable ischemic heart disease: a 
report of the American College of Cardiology Foundation Appropriate Use 
Criteria Task Force, American Heart Association, American Society of Echo-
cardiography, American Society of Nuclear Cardiology, Heart Failure Society 
of America, Heart Rhythm Society, Society for Cardiovascular Angiography 
and Interventions, Society of Cardiovascular Computed Tomography, Soci-
ety for Cardiovascular Magnetic Resonance, and Society of Thoracic Sur-
geons. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2014;63:380–406.
 4. Taylor AJ, Cerqueira M, Hodgson JM, et al. ACCF/SCCT/ACR/AHA/
ASE/ASNC/NASCI/SCAI/SCMR 2010 appropriate use criteria for car-
diac computed tomography: a report of the American College of Cardiol-
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on November 12, 2025

Circulation. 2021;144:e368–e454. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000001029 November 30, 2021 e433
Gulati et al 2021 Chest Pain GuidelineCLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINESogy Foundation Appropriate Use Criteria Task Force, the Society of Car-
diovascular Computed Tomography, the American College of Radiology, the 
American Heart Association, the American Society of Echocardiography, 
the American Society of Nuclear Cardiology, the North American Society 
for Cardiovascular Imaging, the Society for Cardiovascular Angiography and 
Interventions, and the Society for Cardiovascular Magnetic Resonance. Cir-
culation. 2010;122:e525–e555.
 5. Sabik JF 3rd. Understanding saphenous vein graft patency. Circulation. 
2011;124:273–275.
 6. Taggart DP. Current status of arterial grafts for coronary artery bypass graft-
ing. Ann Cardiothorac Surg. 2013;2:427–430.
 7 . Gaudino M, Benedetto U, Fremes S, et al. Radial-artery or saphenous-
vein grafts in coronary-artery bypass surgery. N Engl J Med. 2018;  
378:2069–2077 .
 8. Fihn SD, Blankenship JC, Alexander KP, et al. 2014 ACC/AHA/AATS/
PCNA/SCAI/STS focused update of the guideline for the diagnosis and 
management of patients with stable ischemic heart disease: a report of the 
American College of Cardiology/American Heart Association Task Force 
on Practice Guidelines, and the American Association for Thoracic Surgery, 
Preventive Cardiovascular Nurses Association, Society for Cardiovascular 
Angiography and Interventions, and Society of Thoracic Surgeons. Circula-
tion. 2014;130:1749–1767 .
 9. Hammermeister KE, DeRouen TA, Dodge HT. Variables predictive of sur-
vival in patients with coronary disease. Selection by univariate and multi-
variate analyses from the clinical, electrocardiographic, exercise, arte-
riographic, and quantitative angiographic evaluations. Circulation. 1979;59: 
421–430.
 10. Mark DB, Hlatky MA, Harrell FE Jr, et al. Exercise treadmill score for pre-
dicting prognosis in coronary artery disease. Ann Intern Med. 1987;106: 
793–800.
 11. Levine GN, Bates ER, Blankenship JC, et al. 2011 ACCF/AHA/SCAI 
guideline for percutaneous coronary intervention: a report of the American 
College of Cardiology Foundation/American Heart Association Task Force 
on Practice Guidelines and the Society for Cardiovascular Angiography and 
Interventions. Circulation. 2011;124:e574–e651.
 12. Hillis LD, Smith PK, Anderson JL, et al. 2011 ACCF/AHA guideline for 
coronary artery bypass graft surgery: a report of the American College of 
Cardiology Foundation/American Heart Association Task Force on Practice 
Guidelines. Circulation. 2011;124:e652–e735.
 13. Patel MR, Bailey SR, Bonow RO, et al. ACCF/SCAI/AATS/AHA/ASE/
ASNC/HFSA/HRS/SCCM/SCCT/SCMR/STS 2012 appropriate use 
criteria for diagnostic catheterization: a report of the American College of 
Cardiology Foundation Appropriate Use Criteria Task Force, Society for 
Cardiovascular Angiography and Interventions, American Association for 
Thoracic Surgery, American Heart Association, American Society of Echo-
cardiography, American Society of Nuclear Cardiology, Heart Failure Society 
of America, Heart Rhythm Society, Society of Critical Care Medicine, So-
ciety of Cardiovascular Computed Tomography, Society for Cardiovascular 
Magnetic Resonance, and Society of Thoracic Surgeons. J Am Coll Cardiol. 
2012;59:1995–2027 .
 14. Bittl JA, He Y, Jacobs AK, et al. Bayesian methods affirm the use 
of percutaneous coronary intervention to improve survival in pa-
tients with unprotected left main coronary artery disease. Circulation. 
2013;127:2177–2185.
 15. Costa MA, Trentini CA, Schafranski MD, et al. Factors associated with the 
development of chronic post-sternotomy pain: a case-control study. Braz J 
Cardiovasc Surg. 2015;30:552–556.
 16. van Gulik L, Janssen LI, Ahlers SJ, et al. Risk factors for chronic tho-
racic pain after cardiac surgery via sternotomy. Eur J Cardiothorac Surg. 
2011;40:1309–1313.
 17 . Kalso E, Mennander S, Tasmuth T, et al. Chronic post-sternotomy pain. Acta 
Anaesthesiol Scand. 2001;45:935–939.
 18. Rashidi S, Elenbaas TW, Hamad MA, et al. Does removal of steel wires 
relieve post-sternotomy pain after cardiac surgery? Asian Cardiovasc Thorac 
Ann. 2013;21:409–413.
 19. Lahtinen P, Kokki H, Hynynen M. Pain after cardiac surgery: a prospec-
tive cohort study of 1-year incidence and intensity. Anesthesiology. 
2006;105:794–800.
 20. Marcassa C, Faggiano P, Greco C, et al. A retrospective multicenter study 
on long-term prevalence of chronic pain after cardiac surgery. J Cardiovasc 
Med (Hagerstown). 2015;16:768–774.
 21. Barbero U, Iannaccone M, d'Ascenzo F, et al. 64 slice-coronary comput-
ed tomography sensitivity and specificity in the evaluation of coronary  
artery bypass graft stenosis: a meta-analysis. Int J Cardiol. 2016;  
216:52–57 .4.1.5. Evaluation of Patients With Acute Chest Pain 
Receiving Dialysis
 1. Saran R, Robinson B, Abbott KC, et al. US renal data system 2017 annual 
data report: epidemiology of kidney disease in the United States. Am J Kid-
ney Dis. 2018;71. A7 .
 2. Voroneanu L, Covic A. Arrhythmias in hemodialysis patients. J Nephrol. 
2009;22:716–725.
 3. Herzog CA, Littrell K, Arko C, et al. Clinical characteristics of dialysis pa-
tients with acute myocardial infarction in the United States: a collaborative 
project of the United States Renal Data System and the National Registry 
of Myocardial Infarction. Circulation. 2007;116:1465–1472.
 4. Kielstein JT, Abou-Rebyeh F, Hafer C, et al. Right-sided chest pain at the 
onset of haemodialysis. Nephrol Dial Transplant. 2001;16:1493–1495.
 5. Modi KS, Gross D, Davidman M. The patient developing chest pain at the 
onset of haemodialysis sessions—it is not always angina pectoris. Nephrol 
Dial Transplant. 1999;14:221–223.
 6. Merritt B, Naamon E, Morris SA. The influence of an Urgent Care Center 
on the frequency of ED visits in an urban hospital setting. Am J Emerg Med. 
2000;18:123–125.
 7 . Weinick RM, Burns RM, Mehrotra A. Many emergency department visits 
could be managed at urgent care centers and retail clinics. Health Aff (Mill-
wood). 2010;29:1630–1636.
4.1.6. Evaluation of Acute Chest Pain in Patients 
With Cocaine and Methamphetamine Use
 1. Finkel JB, Marhefka GD. Rethinking cocaine-associated chest pain and 
acute coronary syndromes. Mayo Clin Proc. 2011;86:1198–1207 .
 2. DeFilippis E, Singh A, Divakaran S, et al. Cocaine and marijuana use among 
young adults with myocardial infarction. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2018;71:2540–
2551.
 3. Hawley LA, Auten JD, Matteucci MJ, et al. Cardiac complications of adult 
methamphetamine exposures. J Emerg Med. 2013;45:821–827 .
 4. McCord J, Jneid H, Hollander JE, et al. Management of cocaine-associated 
chest pain and myocardial infarction: a scientific statement from the Ameri-
can Heart Association Acute Cardiac Care Committee of the Council on 
Clinical Cardiology. Circulation. 2008;117:1897–1907 .
 5. Rezkalla SH, Kloner RA. Cocaine-induced acute myocardial infarction. Clin 
Med Res. 2007;5:172–176.
 6. Richards JR, Hamidi S, Grant CD, et al. Methamphetamine use and emergen-
cy department utilization: 20 Y ears Later. J Addict. 2017;2017:4050932.
 7 . Wei GL, Zheng XZ, Chen KQ, et al. Coronary sinus flow is reduced in meth-
amphetamine abusers: a transthoracic echocardiographic study. Int J Car-
diovasc Imaging. 2018;34:1889–1894.
 8. Paratz ED, Zhao J, Sherwen AK, et al. Is an abnormal ECG just the tip 
of the ICE-berg? Examining the utility of electrocardiography in de-
tecting methamphetamine-induced cardiac pathology. Heart Lung Circ. 
2017;26:684–689.
 9. Paratz ED, Cunningham NJ, MacIsaac AI. The cardiac complications of 
methamphetamines. Heart Lung Circ. 2016;25:325–332.
4.1.7. Shared Decision-Making in Patients With 
Acute Chest Pain
 1. Hess EP, Hollander JE, Schaffer JT, et al. Shared decision making in pa-
tients with low risk chest pain: prospective randomized pragmatic trial. BMJ. 
2016;355:i6165.
 2. Hess EP, Knoedler MA, Shah ND, et al. The chest pain choice decision aid: 
a randomized trial. Circ Cardiovasc Qual Outcomes. 2012;5:251–259.
 3. Mayo Clinic. Chest Pain Choice Decision Aid. YouTube. 2016. Available at: 
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=LgOagKX_-nA. Accessed July 26, 2021.
 4. Elwyn G, Tilburt J, Montori VM. The ethical imperative for shared 
decision-making. European Journal for Person Centered Healthcare. 
2013;1:129–213.
 5. Stacey D, Legare F, Lewis K, et al. Decision aids for people facing 
health treatment or screening decisions. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 
2017;4:CD001431.
 6. Hess EP. Clinical judgment is not passe when it comes to identifying pa-
tients with acute myocardial infarction. Evid Based Med. 2016;21:117 .
 7 . Hess E. Authority Psychotherapy and the authority of the therapist in the 
religious Haredi community. Am J Psychoanal. 2018;78:137–158.
 8. Hess EL, Myers EA, Swithers SE, et al. Associations between nonnutri-
tive sweetener intake and metabolic syndrome in adults. J Am Coll Nutr. 
2018;37:487–493.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on November 12, 2025

November 30, 2021 Circulation. 2021;144:e368–e454. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000001029 e434
Gulati et al 2021 Chest Pain GuidelineCLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINES4.2. Evaluation of Acute Chest Pain With 
Nonischemic Cardiac Pathologies
 1. Labovitz AJ, Noble VE, Bierig M, et al. Focused cardiac ultrasound in the 
emergent setting: a consensus statement of the American Society of Echo-
cardiography and American College of Emergency Physicians. J Am Soc 
Echocardiogr. 2010;23:1225–1230.
 2. Roffi M, Patrono C, Collet JP, et al. 2015 ESC guidelines for the manage-
ment of acute coronary syndromes in patients presenting without per-
sistent ST-segment elevation: Task Force for the Management of Acute 
Coronary Syndromes in Patients Presenting Without Persistent ST-Seg-
ment Elevation of the European Society of Cardiology (ESC) Eur Heart J. 
2016;37:267–315.
 3. Amsterdam EA, Wenger NK, Brindis RG, et al. 2014 AHA/ACC guide-
line for the management of patients with non-ST-elevation acute coro-
nary syndromes: a report of the American College of Cardiology/Ameri-
can Heart Association Task Force on Practice Guidelines. Circulation. 
2014;130:e344–e426.
 4. Douglas PS, Garcia MJ, Haines D, et al. ACCF/ASE/AHA/ASNC/
HFSA/HRS/SCAI/SCCM/SCCT/SCMR 2011 appropriate use criteria 
for echocardiography: a report of the American College of Cardiology 
Foundation Appropriate Use Criteria Task Force, American Society of 
Echocardiography, American Heart Association, American Society of Nu-
clear Cardiology, Heart Failure Society of America, Heart Rhythm Soci-
ety, Society for Cardiovascular Angiography and Interventions, Society of 
Critical Care Medicine, Society of Cardiovascular Computed Tomography, 
and Society for Cardiovascular Magnetic Resonance. J Am Coll Cardiol. 
2011;57:1126–1166.
 5. Sicari R, Nihoyannopoulos P, Evangelista A, et al. Stress echocardiography 
expert consensus statement—executive summary: European Association 
of Echocardiography (EAE) (a registered branch of the ESC) Eur Heart J. 
2009;30:278–289.
 6. Medical Advisory Secretariat. Stress echocardiography for the diagnosis of 
coronary artery disease: an evidence-based analysis. Ont Health Technol 
Assess Ser. 2010;10:1–61.
4.2.1. Acute Chest Pain With Suspected Acute Aortic 
Syndrome
 1. Vilacosta I, San Roman JA. Acute aortic syndrome. Heart. 2001;85:365–
368.
 2. Benjamin EJ, Virani SS, Callaway CW, et al. Heart disease and stroke statis-
tics—2018 update: a report from the American Heart Association. Circula-
tion. 2018;137:e67–e492.
 3. Spittell PC, Spittell JA Jr, Joyce JW, et al. Clinical features and differential 
diagnosis of aortic dissection: experience with 236 cases (1980 through 
1990) Mayo Clin Proc. 1993;68:642–651.
 4. Hiratzka LF, Bakris GL, Beckman JA, et al. 2010 ACCF/AHA/AATS/ACR/
ASA/SCA/SCAI/SIR/STS/SVM guidelines for the diagnosis and manage-
ment of patients with thoracic aortic disease. a report of the American Col-
lege of Cardiology Foundation/American Heart Association Task Force on 
Practice Guidelines, American Association for Thoracic Surgery, American 
College of Radiology,American Stroke Association, Society of Cardiovascu-
lar Anesthesiologists, Society for Cardiovascular Angiography and Interven-
tions, Society of Interventional Radiology, Society of Thoracic Surgeons, and 
Society for Vascular Medicine. Circulation. 2010;121:e266–e369.
 5. Mussa FF, Horton JD, Moridzadeh R, et al. Acute aortic dissection and intra-
mural hematoma: a systematic review. JAMA. 2016;316:754–763.
 6. Vardhanabhuti V, Nicol E, Morgan-Hughes G, et al. Recommenda-
tions for accurate CT diagnosis of suspected acute aortic syndrome 
(AAS)–on behalf of the British Society of Cardiovascular Imaging 
(BSCI)/British Society of Cardiovascular CT (BSCCT) Br J Radiol. 
2016;89:20150705.
4.2.2. Acute Chest Pain With Suspected PE
 1. Pollack CV, Schreiber D, Goldhaber SZ, et al. Clinical characteristics, man-
agement, and outcomes of patients diagnosed with acute pulmonary embo-
lism in the emergency department: initial report of EMPEROR (Multicenter 
Emergency Medicine Pulmonary Embolism in the Real World Registry) J Am 
Coll Cardiol. 2011;57:700–706.
 2. Konstantinides SV, Torbicki A, Agnelli G, et al. 2014 ESC guidelines on the 
diagnosis and management of acute pulmonary embolism. Eur Heart J. 
2014;35:3033–3069; 69a-69k. 3. Raja AS, Greenberg JO, Qaseem A, et al. Evaluation of patients with sus-
pected acute pulmonary embolism: best practice advice from the Clinical 
Guidelines Committee of the American College of Physicians. Ann Intern 
Med. 2015;163:701–711.
 4. Ceriani E, Combescure C, Le Gal G, et al. Clinical prediction rules for pulmo-
nary embolism: a systematic review and meta-analysis. J Thromb Haemost. 
2010;8:957–970.
 5. Alotaibi GS, Wu C, Senthilselvan A, et al. Secular trends in incidence and 
mortality of acute venous thromboembolism: the AB-VTE Population-Based 
Study. Am J Med. 2016;129:e19–e25.
 6. Smith SB, Geske JB, Kathuria P, et al. Analysis of national trends in admis-
sions for pulmonary embolism. Chest. 2016;150:35–45.
 7 . Cohen AT, Agnelli G, Anderson FA, et al. Venous thromboembolism (VTE) in 
Europe. The number of VTE events and associated morbidity and mortality. 
Thromb Haemost. 2007;98:756–764.
 8. Kline JA, Jones AE, Shapiro NI, et al. Multicenter, randomized trial of quanti-
tative pretest probability to reduce unnecessary medical radiation exposure 
in emergency department patients with chest pain and dyspnea. Circ Car-
diovasc Imaging. 2014;7:66–73.
4.2.3. Acute Chest Pain With Suspected 
Myopericarditis
 1. Bozkurt B, Colvin M, Cook J, et al. Current diagnostic and treatment strate-
gies for specific dilated cardiomyopathies: a scientific statement from the 
American Heart Association. Circulation. 2016;134:e579–e646.
 2. Ferreira VM, Schulz-Menger J, Holmvang G, et al. Cardiovascular magnetic 
resonance in nonischemic myocardial inflammation: expert recommenda-
tions. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2018;72:3158–3176.
 3. Tornvall P, Gerbaud E, Behaghel A, et al. Myocarditis or "true" infarction by 
cardiac magnetic resonance in patients with a clinical diagnosis of myo-
cardial infarction without obstructive coronary disease: a meta-analysis of 
individual patient data. Atherosclerosis. 2015;241:87–91.
 4. Dastidar AG, Baritussio A, De Garate E, et al. Prognostic role of CMR and 
conventional risk factors in myocardial infarction with nonobstructed coro-
nary arteries. J Am Coll Cardiol Img. 2019;12:1973–1982.
 5. Lintingre PF, Nivet H, Clement-Guinaudeau S, et al. High-resolution late 
gadolinium enhancement magnetic resonance for the diagnosis of myocar-
dial infarction with nonobstructed coronary arteries. J Am Coll Cardiol Img. 
2020;13:1135–1148.
 6. Dastidar AG, Rodrigues JCL, Johnson TW, et al. Myocardial infarction with 
nonobstructed coronary arteries: impact of CMR early after presentation. J 
Am Coll Cardiol Img. 2017;10:1204–1206.
 7 . Klein AL, Abbara S, Agler DA, et al. American Society of Echocardiogra-
phy clinical recommendations for multimodality cardiovascular imaging of 
patients with pericardial disease. J Am Soc Echocardiogr. 2013;26:965–
1012, e15.
 8. Adler Y, Charron P, Imazio M, et al. 2015 ESC guidelines for the diagnosis 
and management of pericardial diseases: the Task Force for the Diagnosis 
and Management of Pericardial Diseases of the European Society of Cardi-
ology (ESC) Eur Heart J. 2015;36:2921–2964.
 9. Taylor AM, Dymarkowski S, Verbeken EK, et al. Detection of pericardial in-
flammation with late-enhancement cardiac magnetic resonance imaging: 
initial results. Eur Radiol. 2006;16:569–574.
 10. Young PM, Glockner JF, Williamson EE, et al. MR imaging findings in 
76 consecutive surgically proven cases of pericardial disease with CT 
and pathologic correlation. Int J Cardiovasc Imaging. 2012;28:1099–
1109.
 11. Aquaro GD, Perfetti M, Camastra G, et al. Cardiac MR with late gadolinium 
enhancement in acute myocarditis with preserved systolic function: ITAMY 
study. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2017;70:1977–1987 .
 12. Grani C, Buechel RR, Kaufmann PA, et al. Multimodality imaging in in-
dividuals with anomalous coronary arteries. J Am Coll Cardiol Img. 
2017;10:471–481.
 13. Hammer MM, Raptis CA, Javidan-Nejad C, et al. Accuracy of computed to-
mography findings in acute pericarditis. Acta Radiol. 2014;55:1197–1202.
 14. Imazio M, Demichelis B, Cecchi E, et al. Cardiac troponin I in acute pericar-
ditis. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2003;42:2144–2148.
 15. Caforio AL, Pankuweit S, Arbustini E, et al. Current state of knowledge on 
aetiology, diagnosis, management, and therapy of myocarditis: a position 
statement of the European Society of Cardiology Working Group on Myo-
cardial and Pericardial Diseases. Eur Heart J. 2013;34:2636–2648; 48a-
48d.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on November 12, 2025

Circulation. 2021;144:e368–e454. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000001029 November 30, 2021 e435
Gulati et al 2021 Chest Pain GuidelineCLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINES 16. Pathik B, Raman B, Mohd Amin NH, et al. Troponin-positive chest pain 
with unobstructed coronary arteries: incremental diagnostic value of car-
diovascular magnetic resonance imaging. Eur Heart J Cardiovasc Imaging. 
2016;17:1146–1152.
 17 . Cosyns B, Plein S, Nihoyanopoulos P, et al. European Association of Cardio-
vascular Imaging (EACVI) position paper: multimodality imaging in pericar-
dial disease. Eur Heart J Cardiovasc Imaging. 2015;16:12–31.
4.2.4. Acute Chest Pain With Valvular Heart Disease
 1. Morrison GW, Thomas RD, Grimmer SF, et al. Incidence of coro-
nary artery disease in patients with valvular heart disease. Br Heart J. 
1980;44:630–637 .
 2. Ahn JH, Kim SM, Park SJ, et al. Coronary microvascular dysfunction as 
a mechanism of angina in severe AS: prospective adenosine-stress CMR 
study. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2016;67:1412–1422.
 3. Otto CM, Nishimura RA, Bonow RO, et al. 2020 ACC/AHA guide-
line for the management of patients with valvular heart disease: a 
report of the American College of Cardiology/American Heart Asso-
ciation Joint Committee on Clinical Practice Guidelines. Circulation. 
2021;143:e72–e227
 4. Hiratzka LF, Bakris GL, Beckman JA, et al. 2010 ACCF/AHA/AATS/ACR/
ASA/SCA/SCAI/SIR/STS/ SVM guidelines for the diagnosis and manage-
ment of patients with thoracic aortic disease: a report of the American Col-
lege of Cardiology Foundation/American Heart Association Task Force on 
Practice Guidelines, American Association for Thoracic Surgery, American 
College of Radiology,American Stroke Association, Society of Cardiovascu-
lar Anesthesiologists, Society for Cardiovascular Angiography and Interven-
tions, Society of Interventional Radiology, Society of Thoracic Surgeons, and 
Society for Vascular Medicine. Circulation. 2010;121:e266–e369.
 5. Lang RM, Badano LP, Tsang W, et al. EAE/ASE recommendations for im-
age acquisition and display using three-dimensional echocardiography. Eur 
Heart J Cardiovasc Imaging. 2012;13:1–46.
 6. Doherty JU, Kort S, Mehran R, et al. ACC/AATS/AHA/ASE/ASNC/HRS/
SCAI/SCCT/SCMR/STS 2017 appropriate use criteria for multimodality 
imaging in valvular heart disease: a report of the American College of Cardiol-
ogy Appropriate Use Criteria Task Force, American Association for Thoracic 
Surgery, American Heart Association, American Society of Echocardiogra-
phy, American Society of Nuclear Cardiology, Heart Rhythm Society, Society 
for Cardiovascular Angiography and Interventions, Society of Cardiovascular 
Computed Tomography, Society for Cardiovascular Magnetic Resonance, and 
Society of Thoracic Surgeons. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2017;70:1647–1672.
4.3. Evaluation of Acute Chest Pain With 
Suspected Noncardiac Causes
4.3.1. Evaluation of Acute Chest Pain With 
Suspected Gastrointestinal Syndromes
 1. Klinkman MS, Stevens D, Gorenflo DW. Episodes of care for chest pain: a 
preliminary report from MIRNET. Michigan Research Network. J Fam Pract. 
1994;38:345–352.
 2. Sengupta JN. An overview of esophageal sensory receptors. Am J Med. 
2000;108(suppl 4a):87S–89S.
 3. Dent J, El-Serag HB, Wallander MA, et al. Epidemiology of gastro-oesoph-
ageal reflux disease: a systematic review. Gut. 2005;54:710–717 .
 4. Richter JE. T ypical and atypical presentations of gastroesophageal reflux 
disease. The role of esophageal testing in diagnosis and management. Gas-
troenterol Clin North Am. 1996;25:75–102.
 5. DeVault KR, Castell DO. Guidelines for the diagnosis and treatment of gas-
troesophageal reflux disease. Practice Parameters Committee of the Ameri-
can College of Gastroenterology. Arch Intern Med. 1995;155:2165–2173.
 6. Hirano I, Richter JE. Practice parameters committee of the American Col-
lege of Gasteroenterology. ACG practice guidelines: esophageal reflux test-
ing. Am J Gastroenterol. 2007;102:668–685.
4.3.2. Evaluation of Acute Chest Pain With 
Suspected Anxiety and Other Psychosomatic 
Considerations
 1. Carter C, Maddock R, Amsterdam E, et al. Panic disorder and chest pain in 
the coronary care unit. Psychosomatics. 1992;33:302–309. 2. Kline JA, Shapiro NI, Jones AE, et al. Outcomes and radiation exposure of 
emergency department patients with chest pain and shortness of breath 
and ultralow pretest probability: a multicenter study. Ann Emerg Med. 
2014;63:281–288.
 3. Webster R, Norman P, Goodacre S, et al. The prevalence and correlates of 
psychological outcomes in patients with acute non-cardiac chest pain: a 
systematic review. Emerg Med J. 2012;29:267–273.
 4. Eslick GD, Talley NJ. Natural history and predictors of outcome for non-
cardiac chest pain: a prospective 4-year cohort study. Neurogastroenterol 
Motil. 2008;20:989–997 .
 5. Foldes-Busque G, Marchand A, Chauny JM, et al. Unexplained chest pain in 
the ED: could it be panic? Am J Emerg Med. 2011;29:743–751.
 6. Musey PI Jr, Kline JA. Emergency department cardiopulmonary evaluation 
of low-risk chest pain patients with self-reported stress and anxiety. J Emerg 
Med. 2017;52:273–279.
 7 . Al-Ani M, Winchester DE. Prevalence and overlap of noncardiac conditions 
in the evaluation of low-risk acute chest pain patients. Crit Pathw Cardiol. 
2015;14:97–102.
 8. Czarnecki A, Wang JT, Tu JV, et al. The role of primary care physician and 
cardiologist follow-up for low-risk patients with chest pain after emergency 
department assessment. Am Heart J. 2014;168:289–295.
 9. White KS, Craft JM, Gervino EV. Anxiety and hypervigilance to cardiopulmo-
nary sensations in non-cardiac chest pain patients with and without psychi-
atric disorders. Behav Res Ther. 2010;48:394–401.
 10. Burgstaller JM, Jenni BF, Steurer J, et al. Treatment efficacy for non-car-
diovascular chest pain: a systematic review and meta-analysis. PLoS One. 
2014;9:e104722.
 11. Kisely SR, Campbell LA, Y elland MJ, et al. Psychological interven-
tions for symptomatic management of non-specific chest pain in pa-
tients with normal coronary anatomy. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 
2015:CD004101.
 12. Mitchell AM, Garvey JL, Chandra A, et al. Prospective multicenter study of 
quantitative pretest probability assessment to exclude acute coronary syn-
drome for patients evaluated in emergency department chest pain units. 
Ann Emerg Med. 2006;47:447 .
 13. Hoorweg BB, Willemsen RT, Cleef LE, et al. Frequency of chest pain in 
primary care, diagnostic tests performed and final diagnoses. Heart. 
2017;103:1727–1732.
 14. Glombiewski JA, Rief W, Bosner S, et al. The course of nonspecific chest 
pain in primary care: symptom persistence and health care usage. Arch In-
tern Med. 2010;170:251–255.
 15. Engel GL. Sudden and rapid death during psychological stress. Folklore or 
folk wisdom? Ann Intern Med. 1971;74:771–782.
 16. Samuels MA. The brain-heart connection. Circulation. 2007;116:77–84.
 17 . Rudehill A, Olsson GL, Sundqvist K, et al. ECG abnormalities in patients with 
subarachnoid haemorrhage and intracranial tumours. J Neurol Neurosurg 
Psychiatry. 1987;50:1375–1381.
 18. Wittstein IS, Thiemann DR, Lima JA, et al. Neurohumoral features of 
myocardial stunning due to sudden emotional stress. N Engl J Med. 
2005;352:539–548.
 19. Medina de Chazal H, Del Buono MG, Keyser-Marcus L, et al. Stress cardio-
myopathy diagnosis and treatment: JACC state-of-the-art review. J Am Coll 
Cardiol. 2018;72:1955–1971.
 20. Bass C, Wade C, Hand D, et al. Patients with angina with normal and near 
normal coronary arteries: clinical and psychosocial state 12 months after 
angiography. Br Med J (Clin Res Ed). 1983;287:1505–1508.
 21. Mukerji V, Beitman BD, Alpert MA. Chest pain and angiographically 
normal coronary arteries. Implications for treatment. Tex Heart Inst J. 
1993;20:170–179.
 22. Lichtlen PR, Bargheer K, Wenzlaff P. Long-term prognosis of patients with 
anginalike chest pain and normal coronary angiographic findings. J Am Coll 
Cardiol. 1995;25:1013–1018.
 23. Esler JL, Barlow DH, Woolard RH, et al. A brief cognitive-behavioral in-
tervention for patients with noncardiac chest pain. Behavior Therapy. 
2003;34:129–148.
 24. Aikens JE, Zvolensky MJ, Eifert GH. Differential fear of cardiopulmonary 
sensations in emergency room noncardiac chest pain patients. J Behav Med. 
2001;24:155–167 .
 25. Eifert GH, Zvolensky MJ, Lejuez CW. Heart-focused anxiety and chest pain: 
a conceptual and clinical review. Clinical Psychology Science and Practice. 
2006;7:403–417 .
 26. Esler JL, Bock BC. Psychological treatments for noncardiac chest pain: 
recommendations for a new approach. J Psychosom Res. 2004;56: 
263–269.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on November 12, 2025

November 30, 2021 Circulation. 2021;144:e368–e454. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000001029 e436
Gulati et al 2021 Chest Pain GuidelineCLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINES 27 . Altintas E, Yigit F, Taskintuna N. The impact of psychiatric disorders with 
cardiac syndrome X on quality of life: 3 months prospective study. Int J Clin 
Exp Med. 2014;7:3520–3527 .
 28. Schwarz J, Prashad A, Winchester DE. Prevalence and implications of se-
vere anxiety in a prospective cohort of acute chest pain patients. Crit Pathw 
Cardiol. 2015;14:44–47 .
 29. Foldes-Busque G, Denis I, Poitras J, et al. A closer look at the relationships 
between panic attacks, emergency department visits and non-cardiac chest 
pain. J Health Psychol. 2017; 1359105316683785.
 30. Campbell KA, Madva EN, Villegas AC, et al. Non-cardiac chest pain: 
a review for the consultation-liaison psychiatrist. Psychosomatics. 
2017;58:252–265.
4.3.3. Evaluation of Acute Chest Pain in Patients 
With Sickle Cell Disease
 1. Platt OS, Brambilla DJ, Rosse WF, et al. Mortality in sickle cell disease. Life expec-
tancy and risk factors for early death. N Engl J Med. 1994;330:1639–1644.
 2. Thomas AN, Pattison C, Serjeant GR. Causes of death in sickle-cell disease 
in Jamaica. Br Med J (Clin Res Ed). 1982;285:633–635.
 3. Vichinsky EP, Styles LA, Colangelo LH, et al. Acute chest syndrome in sickle 
cell disease: clinical presentation and course. Cooperative Study of Sickle 
Cell Disease. Blood. 1997;89:1787–1792.
 4. Martin CR, Johnson CS, Cobb C, et al. Myocardial infarction in sickle cell 
disease. J Natl Med Assoc. 1996;88:428–432.
 5. Ogunbayo GO, Misumida N, Olorunfemi O, et al. Comparison of outcomes 
in patients having acute myocardial infarction with versus without sickle-cell 
anemia. Am J Cardiol. 2017;120:1768–1771.
5. EVALUATION OF PATIENTS WITH 
STABLE CHEST PAIN
5.1. Patients With No Known CAD Presenting 
With Stable Chest Pain
 1. Juarez-Orozco LE, Saraste A, Capodanno D, et al. Impact of a decreasing 
pre-test probability on the performance of diagnostic tests for coronary ar-
tery disease. Eur Heart J Cardiovasc Imaging. 2019;20:1198–1207 .
 2. Winther S, Schmidt SE, Mayrhofer T, et al. Incorporating coronary calcifica-
tion into pre-test assessment of the likelihood of coronary artery disease. J 
Am Coll Cardiol. 2020;76:2421–2432.
5.1.1. Pretest Risk Probability to Guide Need for 
Stress and Anatomic Tests
 1. Juarez-Orozco LE, Saraste A, Capodanno D, et al. Impact of a decreasing 
pre-test probability on the performance of diagnostic tests for coronary 
artery disease. Eur Heart J Cardiovasc Imaging. 2019;20:1198–1207 .
 2. Winther S, Schmidt SE, Mayrhofer T, et al. Incorporating coronary calcifica-
tion into pre-test assessment of the likelihood of coronary artery disease. 
J Am Coll Cardiol. 2020;76:2421–2432.
 3. Genders TS, Steyerberg EW, Alkadhi H, et al. A clinical prediction rule for the 
diagnosis of coronary artery disease: validation, updating, and extension. Eur 
Heart J. 2011;32:1316–1330.
 4. Fordyce CB, Douglas PS, Roberts RS, et al. Identification of patients with 
stable chest pain deriving minimal value from noninvasive testing: the 
PROMISE minimal-risk tool, a secondary analysis of a randomized clinical 
trial. JAMA Cardiol. 2017;2:400–408.
 5. Genders TS, Steyerberg EW, Hunink MG, et al. Prediction model to estimate 
presence of coronary artery disease: retrospective pooled analysis of exist-
ing cohorts. BMJ. 2012;344:e3485.
5.1.2. Low-Risk Patients With Stable Chest Pain and 
No Known CAD
 1. Genders TS, Steyerberg EW, Alkadhi H, et al. A clinical prediction rule for the 
diagnosis of coronary artery disease: validation, updating, and extension. Eur 
Heart J. 2011;32:1316–1330.
 2. Fordyce CB, Douglas PS, Roberts RS, et al. Identification of patients with 
stable chest pain deriving minimal value from noninvasive testing: the PROMISE minimal-risk tool, a secondary analysis of a randomized clinical 
trial. JAMA Cardiol. 2017;2:400–408.
 3. Genders TS, Steyerberg EW, Hunink MG, et al. Prediction model to estimate 
presence of coronary artery disease: retrospective pooled analysis of exist-
ing cohorts. BMJ. 2012;344:e3485.
 4. Juarez-Orozco LE, Saraste A, Capodanno D, et al. Impact of a decreasing 
pre-test probability on the performance of diagnostic tests for coronary ar-
tery disease. Eur Heart J Cardiovasc Imaging. 2019;20:1198–1207 .
 5. Winther S, Schmidt SE, Mayrhofer T, et al. Incorporating coronary calcifica-
tion into pre-test assessment of the likelihood of coronary artery disease. J 
Am Coll Cardiol. 2020;76:2421–2432.
 6. Lubbers M, Coenen A, Kofflard M, et al. Comprehensive cardiac CT with 
myocardial perfusion imaging versus functional testing in suspected coro-
nary artery disease: the multicenter, randomized CRESCENT-II trial. J Am 
Coll Cardiol Img. 2018;11:1625–1636.
 7 . Lubbers M, Dedic A, Coenen A, et al. Calcium imaging and selective com-
puted tomography angiography in comparison to functional testing for sus-
pected coronary artery disease: the multicentre, randomized CRESCENT 
trial. Eur Heart J. 2016;37:1232–1243.
 8. Chang SM, Nabi F, Xu J, et al. The coronary artery calcium score and stress 
myocardial perfusion imaging provide independent and complementary pre-
diction of cardiac risk. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2009;54:1872–1882.
 9. Budoff MJ, Mayrhofer T, Ferencik M, et al. Prognostic value of coronary ar-
tery calcium in the PROMISE study (prospective multicenter imaging study 
for evaluation of chest pain) Circulation. 2017;136:1993–2005.
 10. Shaw LJ, Mieres JH, Hendel RH, et al. Comparative effectiveness of exer-
cise electrocardiography with or without myocardial perfusion single photon 
emission computed tomography in women with suspected coronary artery 
disease: results from the What Is the Optimal Method for Ischemia Evalua-
tion in Women (WOMEN) trial. Circulation. 2011;124:1239–1249.
 11. Douglas PS, Hoffmann U. Anatomical versus functional testing for coronary 
artery disease. N Engl J Med. 2015;373:91.
 12. Hochman JS, Reynolds HR, Bangalore S, et al. Baseline characteristics and 
risk profiles of participants in the ISCHEMIA randomized clinical trial. JAMA 
Cardiol. 2019;4:273–286.
 13. Spertus JA, Jones PG, Maron DJ, et al. Health status after invasive or con-
servative care in coronary and advanced kidney disease. N Engl J Med. 
2020;382:1619–1628.
 14. Rozanski A, Gransar H, Hayes SW, et al. Temporal trends in the frequency of 
inducible myocardial ischemia during cardiac stress testing: 1991 to 2009 
J Am Coll Cardiol. 2013;61:1054–1065.
 15. Cheng VY, Berman DS, Rozanski A, et al. Performance of the traditional age, 
sex, and angina typicality-based approach for estimating pretest probability 
of angiographically significant coronary artery disease in patients undergoing 
coronary computed tomographic angiography: results from the multinational 
coronary CT angiography evaluation for clinical outcomes: an international 
multicenter registry (CONFIRM) Circulation. 2011;124:2423–2432; 1-8.
 16. Baskaran L, Danad I, Gransar H, et al. A comparison of the updated Dia-
mond-Forrester, CAD Consortium, and CONFIRM history-based risk scores 
for predicting obstructive coronary artery disease in patients with stable 
chest pain: the SCOT-HEART Coronary CTA cohort. J Am Coll Cardiol Img. 
2019;12:1392–1400.
 17 . Ferreira AM, Marques H, Tralhao A, et al. Pre-test probability of obstruc-
tive coronary stenosis in patients undergoing coronary CT angiography: 
comparative performance of the modified diamond-Forrester algorithm 
versus methods incorporating cardiovascular risk factors. Int J Cardiol. 
2016;222:346–351.
 18. Foldyna B, Udelson JE, Karady J, et al. Pretest probability for patients with 
suspected obstructive coronary artery disease: re-evaluating Diamond-For-
rester for the contemporary era and clinical implications: insights from the 
PROMISE trial. Eur Heart J Cardiovasc Imaging. 2019;20:574–581.
 19. Bittencourt MS, Hulten E, Polonsky TS, et al. European Society of Cardiol-
ogy-recommended coronary artery disease consortium pretest probability 
scores more accurately predict obstructive coronary disease and cardiovas-
cular events than the Diamond and Forrester score: the Partners registry. 
Circulation. 2016;134:201–211.
 20. Patel MR, Peterson ED, Dai D, et al. Low diagnostic yield of elective coro-
nary angiography. N Engl J Med. 2010;362:886–895.
 21. Patel MR, Dai D, Hernandez AF, et al. Prevalence and predictors of non-
obstructive coronary artery disease identified with coronary angiography in 
contemporary clinical practice. Am Heart J. 2014;167:846–852 e2.
 22. Knuuti J, Wijns W, Saraste A, et al. 2019 ESC guidelines for the diag-
nosis and management of chronic coronary syndromes. Eur Heart J. 
2020;41:407–477 .
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on November 12, 2025

Circulation. 2021;144:e368–e454. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000001029 November 30, 2021 e437
Gulati et al 2021 Chest Pain GuidelineCLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINES5.1.3. Intermediate-High Risk Patients With Stable 
Chest Pain and No Known CAD
 1. Dewey M, Rief M, Martus P, et al. Evaluation of computed tomography in 
patients with atypical angina or chest pain clinically referred for invasive 
coronary angiography: randomised controlled trial. BMJ. 2016;355:i5441.
 2. Meijboom WB, Meijs MF, Schuijf JD, et al. Diagnostic accuracy of 64-slice 
computed tomography coronary angiography: a prospective, multicenter, 
multivendor study. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2008;52:2135–2144.
 3. Budoff MJ, Dowe D, Jollis JG, et al. Diagnostic performance of 64-multi-
detector row coronary computed tomographic angiography for evaluation of 
coronary artery stenosis in individuals without known coronary artery disease: 
results from the prospective multicenter ACCURACY (Assessment by Coro-
nary Computed Tomographic Angiography of Individuals Undergoing Invasive 
Coronary Angiography) trial. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2008;52:1724–1732.
 4. Miller JM, Rochitte CE, Dewey M, et al. Diagnostic performance of coronary 
angiography by 64-row CT. N Engl J Med. 2008;359:2324–2336.
 5. Chang H-J, Lin FY, Gebow D, et al. Selective referral using CCTA versus 
direct referral for individuals referred to invasive coronary angiography for 
suspected CAD: a randomized, controlled, open-label trial. J Am Coll Cardiol 
Img. 2019;12:1303–1312.
 6. Sharma A, Coles A, Sekaran NK, et al. Stress testing versus CT angiography 
in patients with diabetes and suspected coronary artery disease. J Am Coll 
Cardiol. 2019;73:893–902.
 7 . Min JK, Koduru S, Dunning AM, et al. Coronary CT angiography versus 
myocardial perfusion imaging for near-term quality of life, cost and radia-
tion exposure: a prospective multicenter randomized pilot trial. J Cardiovasc 
Comput Tomogr. 2012;6:274–283.
 8. Douglas PS, Hoffmann U, Patel MR, et al. Outcomes of anatomi-
cal versus functional testing for coronary artery disease. N Engl J Med. 
2015;372:1291–1300.
 9. SCOT-HEART Investigators. Coronary CT angiography and 5-year risk of 
myocardial infarction. N Engl J Med. 2018;379:924–933.
 10. SCOT-HEART Investigators. CT coronary angiography in patients with sus-
pected angina due to coronary heart disease (SCOT-HEART): an open-
label, parallel-group, multicentre trial. Lancet. 2015;385:2383–2391.
 11. McKavanagh P, Lusk L, Ball PA, et al. A comparison of cardiac computerized 
tomography and exercise stress electrocardiogram test for the investigation 
of stable chest pain: the clinical results of the CAPP randomized prospective 
trial. Eur Heart J Cardiovasc Imaging. 2015;16:441–448.
 12. Douglas PS, Pontone G, Hlatky MA, et al. Clinical outcomes of fractional 
flow reserve by computed tomographic angiography-guided diagnostic 
strategies vs. usual care in patients with suspected coronary artery disease: 
the prospective longitudinal trial of FFR(CT): outcome and resource impacts 
study. Eur Heart J. 2015;36:3359–3367 .
 13. Fihn SD, Gardin JM, Abrams J, et al. 2012 ACCF/AHA/ACP/AATS/
PCNA/SCAI/STS guideline for the diagnosis and management of patients 
with stable ischemic heart disease: a report of the American College of 
Cardiology Foundation/American Heart Association Task Force on Practice 
Guidelines, and the American College of Physicians, American Association 
for Thoracic Surgery, Preventive Cardiovascular Nurses Association, Society 
for Cardiovascular Angiography and Interventions, and Society of Thoracic 
Surgeons. Circulation. 2012;126:e354–e471.
 14. Douglas PS, Garcia MJ, Haines D, et al. ACCF/ASE/AHA/ASNC/HFSA/
HRS/SCAI/SCCM/SCCT/SCMR 2011 appropriate use criteria for echo-
cardiography: a report of the American College of Cardiology Foundation 
Appropriate Use Criteria Task Force, American Society of Echocardiog-
raphy, American Heart Association, American Society of Nuclear Cardiol-
ogy, Heart Failure Society of America, Heart Rhythm Society, Society for 
Cardiovascular Angiography and Interventions, Society of Critical Care 
Medicine, Society of Cardiovascular Computed Tomography, and Soci-
ety for Cardiovascular Magnetic Resonance. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2011;57: 
1126–1166.
 15. Gurunathan S, Zacharias K, Akhtar M, et al. Cost-effectiveness of a 
management strategy based on exercise echocardiography versus ex-
ercise electrocardiography in patients presenting with suspected an-
gina during long term follow up: a randomized study. Int J Cardiol. 2018; 
259:1–7 .
 16. Carpeggiani C, Landi P, Michelassi C, et al. Stress echocardiography positiv-
ity predicts cancer death. J Am Heart Assoc. 2017;6:e007104.
 17 . Hoffmann U, Ferencik M, Udelson JE, et al. Prognostic value of noninvasive 
cardiovascular testing in patients with stable chest pain: insights from the 
PROMISE trial (Prospective Multicenter Imaging Study for Evaluation of 
Chest Pain) Circulation. 2017;135:2320–2332. 18. Abdelmoneim SS, Ball CA, Mantovani F, et al. Prognostic utility of stress 
testing and cardiac biomarkers in menopausal women at low to interme-
diate risk for coronary artery disease (SMART Study): 5-year outcome. J 
Womens Health (Larchmt). 2018;27:542–551.
 19. Cortigiani L, Urluescu ML, Coltelli M, et al. Apparent declining prognostic 
value of a negative stress echocardiography based on regional wall motion 
abnormalities in patients with normal resting left ventricular function due to 
the changing referral profile of the population under study. Circ Cardiovasc 
Imaging. 2019;12:e008564.
 20. Gibbons RJ, Hodge DO, Berman DS, et al. Long-term outcome of pa-
tients with intermediate-risk exercise electrocardiograms who do not 
have myocardial perfusion defects on radionuclide imaging. Circulation. 
1999;100:2140–2145.
 21. Rozanski A, Gransar H, Min JK, et al. Long-term mortality following normal 
exercise myocardial perfusion SPECT according to coronary disease risk 
factors. J Nucl Cardiol. 2014;21:341–350.
 22. Bourque JM, Holland BH, Watson DD, et al. Achieving an exercise workload 
of > or = 10 metabolic equivalents predicts a very low risk of inducible 
ischemia: does myocardial perfusion imaging have a role? J Am Coll Cardiol. 
2009;54:538–545.
 23. Shaw LJ, Wilson PW, Hachamovitch R, et al. Improved near-term coronary 
artery disease risk classification with gated stress myocardial perfusion 
SPECT. J Am Coll Cardiol Img. 2010;3:1139–1148.
 24. Shaw LJ, Min JK, Hachamovitch R, et al. Nomograms for estimating cor-
onary artery disease prognosis with gated stress myocardial perfusion 
SPECT. J Nucl Cardiol. 2012;19:43–52.
 25. Uretsky S, Rozanski A. Long-term outcomes following a normal stress myo-
cardial perfusion scan. J Nucl Cardiol. 2013;20:715–718.
 26. Patel KK, Al Badarin F, Chan PS, et al. Randomized comparison of clinical 
effectiveness of pharmacologic SPECT and PET MPI in symptomatic CAD 
patients. J Am Coll Cardiol Img. 2019;12:1821–1831.
 27 . Dorbala S, Di Carli MF, Beanlands RS, et al. Prognostic value of stress myo-
cardial perfusion positron emission tomography: results from a multicenter 
observational registry. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2013;61:176–184.
 28. Kay J, Dorbala S, Goyal A, et al. Influence of sex on risk stratification with 
stress myocardial perfusion Rb-82 positron emission tomography: results 
from the PET (Positron Emission Tomography) Prognosis Multicenter Reg-
istry. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2013;62:1866–1876.
 29. Greenwood JP, Maredia N, Younger JF, et al. Cardiovascular magnetic 
resonance and single-photon emission computed tomography for diag-
nosis of coronary heart disease (CE-MARC): a prospective trial. Lancet. 
2012;379:453–460.
 30. Schwitter J, Wacker CM, Wilke N, et al. MR-IMPACT II: Magnetic Resonance 
Imaging for Myocardial Perfusion Assessment in Coronary artery disease 
Trial: perfusion-cardiac magnetic resonance vs. single-photon emission 
computed tomography for the detection of coronary artery disease: a com-
parative multicentre, multivendor trial. Eur Heart J. 2013;34:775–781.
 31. Hamon M, Fau G, Nee G, et al. Meta-analysis of the diagnostic performance 
of stress perfusion cardiovascular magnetic resonance for detection of 
coronary artery disease. J Cardiovasc Magn Reson. 2010;12:29.
 32. Jaarsma C, Leiner T, Bekkers SC, et al. Diagnostic performance of noninva-
sive myocardial perfusion imaging using single-photon emission computed 
tomography, cardiac magnetic resonance, and positron emission tomog-
raphy imaging for the detection of obstructive coronary artery disease: a 
meta-analysis. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2012;59:1719–1728.
 33. Schwitter J, Wacker CM, Wilke N, et al. Superior diagnostic performance of per-
fusion-cardiovascular magnetic resonance versus SPECT to detect coronary 
artery disease: the secondary endpoints of the multicenter multivendor MR-
IMPACT II (Magnetic Resonance Imaging for Myocardial Perfusion Assess-
ment in Coronary Artery Disease Trial) J Cardiovasc Magn Reson. 2012;14:61.
 34. Greenwood JP, Ripley DP, Berry C, et al. Effect of care guided by cardio-
vascular magnetic resonance, myocardial perfusion scintigraphy, or NICE 
guidelines on subsequent unnecessary angiography rates: the CE-MARC 2 
randomized clinical trial. JAMA. 2016;316:1051–1060.
 35. Nagel E, Greenwood JP, McCann GP, et al. Magnetic resonance perfusion or frac-
tional flow reserve in coronary disease. N Engl J Med. 2019;380:2418–2428.
 36. Knuuti J, Ballo H, Juarez-Orozco LE, et al. The performance of non-invasive 
tests to rule-in and rule-out significant coronary artery stenosis in patients 
with stable angina: a meta-analysis focused on post-test disease probability. 
Eur Heart J. 2018;39:3322–3330.
 37 . Danad I, Raijmakers PG, Driessen RS, et al. Comparison of coronary 
CT angiography, SPECT, PET, and hybrid imaging for diagnosis of isch-
emic heart disease determined by fractional flow reserve. JAMA Cardiol. 
2017;2:1100–1107 .
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on November 12, 2025

November 30, 2021 Circulation. 2021;144:e368–e454. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000001029 e438
Gulati et al 2021 Chest Pain GuidelineCLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINES 38. Neglia D, Rovai D, Caselli C, et al. Detection of significant coronary artery 
disease by noninvasive anatomical and functional imaging. Circ Cardiovasc 
Imaging. 2015;8:e002179.
 39. Danad I, Szymonifka J, Twisk JWR, et al. Diagnostic performance of cardiac 
imaging methods to diagnose ischaemia-causing coronary artery disease 
when directly compared with fractional flow reserve as a reference stan-
dard: a meta-analysis. Eur Heart J. 2017;38:991–998.
 40. Shaw LJ, Mieres JH, Hendel RH, et al. Comparative effectiveness of exer-
cise electrocardiography with or without myocardial perfusion single photon 
emission computed tomography in women with suspected coronary artery 
disease: results from the What Is the Optimal Method for Ischemia Evalua-
tion in Women (WOMEN) trial. Circulation. 2011;124:1239–1249.
 41. Mieres JH, Gulati M, Bairey Merz N, et al. Role of noninvasive testing in 
the clinical evaluation of women with suspected ischemic heart disease: 
a consensus statement from the American Heart Association. Circulation. 
2014;130:350–379.
 42. Mark DB, Shaw L, Harrell FE Jr, et al. Prognostic value of a treadmill exer-
cise score in outpatients with suspected coronary artery disease. N Engl J 
Med. 1991;325:849–853.
 43. Mark DB, Hlatky MA, Harrell FE Jr, et al. Exercise treadmill score 
for predicting prognosis in coronary artery disease. Ann Intern Med. 
1987;106:793–800.
 44. Lauer MS, Pothier CE, Magid DJ, et al. An externally validated model for 
predicting long-term survival after exercise treadmill testing in patients with 
suspected coronary artery disease and a normal electrocardiogram. Ann In-
tern Med. 2007;147:821–828.
 45. Gulati M, Black HR, Shaw LJ, et al. The prognostic value of a nomogram for 
exercise capacity in women. N Engl J Med. 2005;353:468–475.
 46. Ardestani A, Ahlberg AW, Katten DM, et al. Risk stratification using line 
source attenuation correction with rest/stress Tc-99m sestamibi SPECT 
myocardial perfusion imaging. J Nucl Cardiol. 2014;21:118–126.
 47 . van Dijk JD, Mouden M, Ottervanger JP, et al. Value of attenuation correc-
tion in stress-only myocardial perfusion imaging using CZT-SPECT. J Nucl 
Cardiol. 2017;24:395–401.
 48. Gutstein A, Bental T, Solodky A, et al. Prognosis of stress-only SPECT 
myocardial perfusion imaging with prone imaging. J Nucl Cardiol. 
2018;25:809–816.
 49. Huang JY, Y en RF, Lee WC, et al. Improved diagnostic accuracy of thalli-
um-201 myocardial perfusion single-photon emission computed tomog-
raphy with CT attenuation correction. J Nucl Cardiol. 2019;26:1584–
1595.
 50. Huang JY, Huang CK, Y en RF, et al. Diagnostic performance of attenuation-
corrected myocardial perfusion imaging for coronary artery disease: a sys-
tematic review and meta-analysis. J Nucl Med. 2016;57:1893–1898.
 51. Ito S, Endo A, Okada T, et al. Comparison of CTAC and prone imaging for 
the detection of coronary artery disease using CZT SPECT. Ann Nucl Med. 
2017;31:629–635.
 52. Gibbons RJ, Carryer D, Liu H, et al. Use of echocardiography in outpatients 
with chest pain and normal resting electrocardiograms referred to Mayo 
Clinic Rochester. Am Heart J. 2018;196:49–55.
 53. Douglas PS, De Bruyne B, Pontone G, et al. 1-year outcomes of FFRCT-
guided care in patients with suspected coronary disease: the PLATFORM 
Study. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2016;68:435–445.
 54. Fairbairn TA, Nieman K, Akasaka T, et al. Real-world clinical utility and im-
pact on clinical decision-making of coronary computed tomography angiog-
raphy-derived fractional flow reserve: lessons from the ADVANCE Registry. 
Eur Heart J. 2018;39:3701–3711.
 55. Patel MR, Norgaard BL, Fairbairn TA, et al. 1-Y ear impact on medical prac-
tice and clinical outcomes of FFRCT: the ADVANCE registry. J Am Coll 
Cardiol Img. 2019;13:97–105.
 56. Min JK, Leipsic J, Pencina MJ, et al. Diagnostic accuracy of fractional flow 
reserve from anatomic CT angiography. JAMA. 2012;308:1237–1245.
 57 . Norgaard BL, Leipsic J, Gaur S, et al. Diagnostic performance of noninva-
sive fractional flow reserve derived from coronary computed tomography 
angiography in suspected coronary artery disease: the NXT trial (Analysis of 
Coronary Blood Flow Using CT Angiography: Next Steps) J Am Coll Cardiol. 
2014;63:1145–1155.
 58. Andreini D, Modolo R, Katagiri Y, et al. Impact of fractional flow reserve 
derived from coronary computed tomography angiography on heart team 
treatment decision-making in patients with multivessel coronary artery dis-
ease: insights from the SYNTAX III REVOLUTION Trial. Circ Cardiovasc In-
terv. 2019;12:e007607 .
 59. Abidov A, Gallagher MJ, Chinnaiyan KM, et al. Clinical effectiveness 
of coronary computed tomographic angiography in the triage of pa-tients to cardiac catheterization and revascularization after inconclu-
sive stress testing: results of a 2-year prospective trial. J Nucl Cardiol. 
2009;16:701–713.
 60. Christman MP, Bittencourt MS, Hulten E, et al. Yield of downstream tests 
after exercise treadmill testing: a prospective cohort study. J Am Coll Cardiol. 
2014;63:1264–1274.
 61. Shaw LJ, Hausleiter J, Achenbach S, et al. Coronary computed tomographic 
angiography as a gatekeeper to invasive diagnostic and surgical proce-
dures: results from the multicenter CONFIRM (Coronary CT Angiography 
Evaluation for Clinical Outcomes: an International Multicenter) registry. J Am 
Coll Cardiol. 2012;60:2103–2114.
 62. ISCHEMIA Trial Research Group, Maron DJ, Hochman JS, et al. Interna-
tional Study of Comparative Health Effectiveness with Medical and In-
vasive Approaches (ISCHEMIA) trial: rationale and design. Am Heart J. 
2018;201:124–135.
 63. Maron DJ, Hochman JS, Reynolds HR, et al. Initial invasive or conservative 
strategy for stable coronary disease. N Engl J Med. 2020;382:1395–1407 .
 64. Schepis T, Gaemperli O, Koepfli P, et al. Added value of coronary ar-
tery calcium score as an adjunct to gated SPECT for the evaluation of 
coronary artery disease in an intermediate-risk population. J Nucl Med. 
2007;48:1424–1430.
 65. Chang SM, Nabi F, Xu J, et al. The coronary artery calcium score and stress 
myocardial perfusion imaging provide independent and complementary pre-
diction of cardiac risk. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2009;54:1872–1882.
 66. Bavishi C, Argulian E, Chatterjee S, et al. CACS and the frequency of stress-
induced myocardial ischemia during MPI: a meta-analysis. J Am Coll Cardiol 
Img. 2016;9:580–589.
 67 . Rozanski A, Gransar H, Wong ND, et al. Use of coronary calcium scanning 
for predicting inducible myocardial ischemia: influence of patients' clinical 
presentation. J Nucl Cardiol. 2007;14:669–679.
 68. Brodov Y, Gransar H, Dey D, et al. Combined quantitative assessment of 
myocardial perfusion and coronary artery calcium score by hybrid 82Rb 
PET/CT improves detection of coronary artery disease. J Nucl Med. 
2015;56:1345–1350.
 69. Ghadri JR, Pazhenkottil AP, Nkoulou RN, et al. Very high coronary calcium 
score unmasks obstructive coronary artery disease in patients with normal 
SPECT MPI. Heart. 2011;97:998–1003.
 70. Schenker MP, Dorbala S, Hong EC, et al. Interrelation of coronary calci-
fication, myocardial ischemia, and outcomes in patients with intermediate 
likelihood of coronary artery disease: a combined positron emission tomog-
raphy/computed tomography study. Circulation. 2008;117:1693–1700.
 71. Marwick TH, Case C, Vasey C, et al. Prediction of mortality by exercise echo-
cardiography: a strategy for combination with the Duke Treadmill Score. Cir-
culation. 2001;103:2566–2571.
 72. Sicari R, Nihoyannopoulos P, Evangelista A, et al. Stress echocardiography 
expert consensus statement—executive summary: European Association 
of Echocardiography (EAE) (a registered branch of the ESC) Eur Heart J. 
2009;30:278–289.
 73. Vitola JV, Wanderley MR Jr, Cerci RJ, et al. Outcome of patients with high-
risk Duke Treadmill Score and normal myocardial perfusion imaging on 
SPECT. J Nucl Cardiol. 2016;23:1291–1300.
 74. Boiten HJ, van Domburg RT, Valkema R, et al. Eleven-year prognos-
tic value of dobutamine stress (99m)Tc-sestamibi myocardial perfu-
sion imaging in patients with limited exercise capacity. Am J Cardiol. 
2015;115:884–889.
 75. Uretsky S, Supariwala A, Gurram S, et al. The interaction of exercise ability 
and body mass index upon long-term outcomes among patients undergoing 
stress-rest perfusion single-photon emission computed tomography imag-
ing. Am Heart J. 2013;166:127–133.
 76. Bourque JM, Charlton GT, Holland BH, et al. Prognosis in patients achieving 
>/=10 METS on exercise stress testing: was SPECT imaging useful? J 
Nucl Cardiol. 2011;18:230–237 .
 77 . Rozanski A, Gransar H, Hayes SW, et al. Temporal trends in the frequency of 
inducible myocardial ischemia during cardiac stress testing: 1991 to 2009 
J Am Coll Cardiol. 2013;61:1054–1065.
 78. Patel MR, Peterson ED, Dai D, et al. Low diagnostic yield of elective coro-
nary angiography. N Engl J Med. 2010;362:886–895.
 79. Patel MR, Dai D, Hernandez AF, et al. Prevalence and predictors of non-
obstructive coronary artery disease identified with coronary angiography in 
contemporary clinical practice. Am Heart J. 2014;167:846–852 e2.
 80. Greenwood JP, Ripley DP, Berry C, et al. Effect of care guided by cardio-
vascular magnetic resonance, myocardial perfusion scintigraphy, or NICE 
guidelines on subsequent unnecessary angiography rates: the CE-MARC 2 
randomized clinical trial. JAMA. 2016;316:1051–1060.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on November 12, 2025

Circulation. 2021;144:e368–e454. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000001029 November 30, 2021 e439
Gulati et al 2021 Chest Pain GuidelineCLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINES  81. Juarez-Orozco LE, Saraste A, Capodanno D, et al. Impact of a decreasing 
pre-test probability on the performance of diagnostic tests for coronary 
artery disease. Eur Heart J Cardiovasc Imaging. 2019;20:1198–1207 .
 82. Winther S, Schmidt SE, Mayrhofer T, et al. Incorporating coronary calcifica-
tion into pre-test assessment of the likelihood of coronary artery disease. J 
Am Coll Cardiol. 2020;76:2421–2432.
 83. Lowenstern A, Alexander KP, Hill CL, et al. Age-related differences in the 
noninvasive evaluation for possible coronary artery disease: insights from 
the Prospective Multicenter Imaging Study for Evaluation of Chest Pain 
(PROMISE) Trial. JAMA Cardiol. 2020;5:193–201.
 84. Chang HJ, Lin FY, Gebow D, et al. Selective referral using CCTA versus 
direct referral for individuals referred to invasive coronary angiography for 
suspected CAD: a randomized, controlled, open-label trial. J Am Coll Cardiol 
Img. 2019;12:1303–1312.
 85. Grundy SM, Stone NJ, Bailey AL, et al. 2018 AHA/ACC/AACVPR/AAPA/
ABC/ACPM/ADA/AGS/APhA/ ASPC/NLA/PCNA guideline on the 
management of blood cholesterol: a report of the American College of 
Cardiology/American Heart Association Task Force on Clinical Practice 
Guidelines. Circulation. 2019;139:e1082–e1143.
 86. Fihn SD, Blankenship JC, Alexander KP, et al. 2014 ACC/AHA/AATS/
PCNA/SCAI/STS focused update of the guideline for the diagnosis and 
management of patients with stable ischemic heart disease: a report of the 
American College of Cardiology/American Heart Association Task Force 
on Practice Guidelines, and the American Association for Thoracic Surgery, 
Preventive Cardiovascular Nurses Association, Society for Cardiovascular 
Angiography and Interventions, and Society of Thoracic Surgeons. 
Circulation. 2014;130:1749–1767 .
 87 . Arnett DK, Blumenthal R, Albert M, et al. 2019 ACC/AHA guideline on 
the primary prevention of cardiovascular disease: a report of the American 
College of Cardiology/American Heart Association Task Force on Clinical 
Practice Guidelines. Circulation. 2019;140:e596–e646.
 88. Budoff MJ, Li D, Kazerooni EA, et al. Diagnostic accuracy of noninvasive 
64-row computed tomographic coronary angiography (CCTA) compared 
with myocardial perfusion imaging (MPI): the PICTURE study, a prospec-
tive multicenter trial. Acad Radiol. 2017;24:22–29.
 89. SCOT-HEART Investigators, Newby DE, Adamson PD, et al. Coronary 
CT angiography and 5-year risk of myocardial infarction. N Engl J Med. 
2018;379:924–933.
 90. Williams MC, Hunter A, Shah ASV, et al. Use of coronary computed to-
mographic angiography to guide management of patients with coronary 
disease. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2016;67:1759–1768.
 91. Ladapo JA, Hoffmann U, Lee KL, et al. Changes in medical therapy and 
lifestyle after anatomical or functional testing for coronary artery disease. J 
Am Heart Assoc. 2016;5:e003807 .
 92. Mark DB, Anstrom KJ, Sheng S, et al. Quality-of-life outcomes with ana-
tomic versus functional diagnostic testing strategies in symptomatic pa-
tients with suspected coronary artery disease: results from the PROMISE 
randomized trial. Circulation. 2016;133:1995–2007 .
 93. Adamson PD, Williams MC, Dweck MR, et al. Guiding therapy by coronary 
CT angiography improves outcomes in patients with stable chest pain. J 
Am Coll Cardiol. 2019;74:2058–2070.
 94. Hulten E, Bittencourt MS, Singh A, et al. Coronary artery disease detected 
by coronary computed tomographic angiography is associated with inten-
sification of preventive medical therapy and lower low-density lipoprotein 
cholesterol. Circ Cardiovasc Imaging. 2014;7:629–638.
 95. Norgaard BL, Terkelsen CJ, Mathiassen ON, et al. Coronary CT angio-
graphic and flow reserve-guided management of patients with stable isch-
emic heart disease. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2018;72:2123–2134.
 96. Bittencourt MS, Hulten EA, Murthy VL, et al. Clinical outcomes after 
evaluation of stable chest pain by coronary computed tomographic an-
giography versus usual care: a meta-analysis. Circ Cardiovasc Imaging. 
2016;9:e004419.
 97 . McCully RB, Roger VL, Mahoney DW, et al. Outcome after normal exercise 
echocardiography and predictors of subsequent cardiac events: follow-up 
of 1 325 patients. J Am Coll Cardiol. 1998;31:144–149.
 98. Metz LD, Beattie M, Hom R, et al. The prognostic value of normal exercise 
myocardial perfusion imaging and exercise echocardiography: a meta-
analysis. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2007;49:227–237 .
 99. Smulders MW, Jaarsma C, Nelemans PJ, et al. Comparison of the prognos-
tic value of negative non-invasive cardiac investigations in patients with 
suspected or known coronary artery disease-a meta-analysis. Eur Heart J 
Cardiovasc Imaging. 2017;18:980–987 .
 100. Douglas PS, Hoffmann U, Patel MR, et al. Outcomes of anatomi-
cal versus functional testing for coronary artery disease. N Engl J Med. 
2015;372:1291–1300. 101. Shaw LJ, Hage FG, Berman DS, et al. Prognosis in the era of comparative 
effectiveness research: where is nuclear cardiology now and where should 
it be? J Nucl Cardiol. 2012;19:1026–1043.
 102. Green R, Cantoni V, Petretta M, et al. Negative predictive value of stress 
myocardial perfusion imaging and coronary computed tomography angiog-
raphy: a meta-analysis. J Nucl Cardiol. 2018;25:1588–1597 .
 103. Bom MJ, van Diemen PA, Driessen RS, et al. Prognostic value of [15O]
H2O positron emission tomography-derived global and regional myocardial 
perfusion. Eur Heart J Cardiovasc Imaging. 2020;21:777–786.
 104. Driessen RS, Danad I, Stuijfzand WJ, et al. Comparison of coronary com-
puted tomography angiography, fractional flow reserve, and perfusion im-
aging for ischemia diagnosis. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2019;73:161–173.
 105. Greenwood JP, Herzog BA, Brown JM, et al. Prognostic value of cardiovascu-
lar magnetic resonance and single-photon emission computed tomography 
in suspected coronary heart disease: long-term follow-up of a prospective, 
diagnostic accuracy cohort study. Ann Intern Med. 2016;165:1–9.
 106. Rabbat M, Leipsic J, Bax J, et al. Fractional flow reserve derived from coro-
nary computed tomography angiography safely defers invasive coronary 
angiography in patients with stable coronary artery disease. J Clin Med. 
2020;9:604.
 107 . Cami E, Tagami T, Raff G, et al. Importance of measurement site on as-
sessment of lesion-specific ischemia and diagnostic performance by coro-
nary computed tomography angiography-derived fractional flow reserve. J 
Cardiovasc Comput Tomogr. 2021;15:114–120.
 108. Hochman JS, Reynolds HR, Bangalore S, et al. Baseline characteristics 
and risk profiles of participants in the ISCHEMIA randomized clinical trial. 
JAMA Cardiol. 2019;4:273–286.
 109. Blankstein R, Di Carli MF. Integration of coronary anatomy and myocardial 
perfusion imaging. Nat Rev Cardiol. 2010;7:226–236.
 110. Berman DS, Wong ND, Gransar H, et al. Relationship between stress-
induced myocardial ischemia and atherosclerosis measured by coronary 
calcium tomography. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2004;44:923–930.
 111. Marcos-Garces V, Gavara J, Monmeneu JV, et al. Vasodilator stress CMR 
and all-cause mortality in stable ischemic heart disease: a large retrospec-
tive registry. J Am Coll Cardiol Img. 2020;13:1674–1686.
 112. Kwong RY, Ge Y, Steel K, et al. Cardiac magnetic resonance stress perfu-
sion imaging for evaluation of patients with chest pain. J Am Coll Cardiol. 
2019;74:1741–1755.
 113. Ahmad IG, Abdulla RK, Klem I, et al. Comparison of stress cardiovascular 
magnetic resonance imaging (CMR) with stress nuclear perfusion for the 
diagnosis of coronary artery disease. J Nucl Cardiol. 2016;23:287–297 .
5.2. Patients With Known CAD Presenting With 
Stable Chest Pain
 1. Boden WE, O'Rourke RA, Teo KK, et al. Optimal medical therapy with or 
without PCI for stable coronary disease. N Engl J Med. 2007;356:1503–
1516.
 2. BARI 2D Study Group, Frye RL, August P, et al. A randomized trial of 
therapies for type 2 diabetes and coronary artery disease. N Engl J Med. 
2009;360:2503–2515.
 3. Maron DJ, Hochman JS, Reynolds HR, et al. Initial invasive or conservative 
strategy for stable coronary disease. N Engl J Med. 2020;382:1395–1407 .
 4. Arnett DK, Blumenthal R, Albert M, et al. 2019 ACC/ AHA guideline on 
the primary prevention of cardiovascular disease: a report of the American 
College of Cardiology/American Heart Association Task Force on Clinical 
Practice Guidelines. Circulation. 2019;140:e596–e646.
 5. Grundy SM, Stone NJ, Bailey AL, et al. 2018 AHA/ACC/AACVPR/AAPA/
ABC/ACPM/ADA/AGS/APhA/ ASPC/NLA/PCNA guideline on the man-
agement of blood cholesterol: a report of the American College of Cardiol-
ogy/American Heart Association Task Force on Clinical Practice Guidelines. 
Circulation. 2019;139:e1082–e1143.
 6. Fihn SD, Blankenship JC, Alexander KP, et al. 2014 ACC/AHA/AATS/
PCNA/SCAI/STS focused update of the guideline for the diagnosis and 
management of patients with stable ischemic heart disease: a report of the 
American College of Cardiology/American Heart Association Task Force 
on Practice Guidelines, and the American Association for Thoracic Surgery, 
Preventive Cardiovascular Nurses Association, Society for Cardiovascular 
Angiography and Interventions, and Society of Thoracic Surgeons. Circula-
tion. 2014;130:1749–1767 .
 7 . Fihn SD, Gardin JM, Abrams J, et al. 2012 ACCF/AHA/ACP/AATS/
PCNA/SCAI/STS guideline for the diagnosis and management of patients 
with stable ischemic heart disease: a report of the American College of 
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on November 12, 2025

November 30, 2021 Circulation. 2021;144:e368–e454. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000001029 e440
Gulati et al 2021 Chest Pain GuidelineCLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINESCardiology Foundation/American Heart Association Task Force on Practice 
Guidelines, and the American College of Physicians, American Association 
for Thoracic Surgery, Preventive Cardiovascular Nurses Association, Society 
for Cardiovascular Angiography and Interventions, and Society of Thoracic 
Surgeons. Circulation. 2012;126:e354–e471.
5.2.1. Patients With Obstructive CAD Who Present 
With Stable Chest Pain
 1. Boden WE, O'Rourke RA, Teo KK, et al. Optimal medical therapy with or 
without PCI for stable coronary disease. N Engl J Med. 2007;356:1503–
1516.
 2. BARI 2D Study Group, Frye RL, August P, et al. A randomized trial of 
therapies for type 2 diabetes and coronary artery disease. N Engl J Med. 
2009;360:2503–2515.
 3. De Bruyne B, Pijls NH, Kalesan B, et al. Fractional flow reserve-guided 
PCI versus medical therapy in stable coronary disease. N Engl J Med. 
2012;367:991–1001.
 4. Maron DJ, Hochman JS, Reynolds HR, et al. Initial invasive or conserva-
tive strategy for stable coronary disease. N Engl J Med. 2020;382:1395–
1 4 07.
 5. De Bruyne B, Fearon WF, Pijls NH, et al. Fractional flow reserve-guided PCI 
for stable coronary artery disease. N Engl J Med. 2014;371:1208–1217 .
 6. Tonino PA, De Bruyne B, Pijls NH, et al. Fractional flow reserve versus an-
giography for guiding percutaneous coronary intervention. N Engl J Med. 
2009;360:213–224.
 7 . Bhatt DL. Assessment of stable coronary lesions. N Engl J Med. 
2017;376:1879–1881.
 8. Patel MR, Bailey SR, Bonow RO, et al. ACCF/SCAI/AATS/AHA/ASE/
ASNC/HFSA/HRS/SCCM/SCCT/SCMR/STS 2012 appropriate use 
criteria for diagnostic catheterization: a report of the American College of 
Cardiology Foundation Appropriate Use Criteria Task Force, Society for 
Cardiovascular Angiography and Interventions, American Association for 
Thoracic Surgery, American Heart Association, American Society of Echo-
cardiography, American Society of Nuclear Cardiology, Heart Failure Society 
of America, Heart Rhythm Society, Society of Critical Care Medicine, So-
ciety of Cardiovascular Computed Tomography, Society for Cardiovascular 
Magnetic Resonance, and Society of Thoracic Surgeons. J Am Coll Cardiol. 
2012;59:1995–2027 .
 9. Suh Y J, Hong Y J, Lee HJ, et al. Accuracy of CT for selecting candidates for 
coronary artery bypass graft surgery: combination with the SYNTAX score. 
Radiology. 2015;276:390–399.
 10. Chan M, Ridley L, Dunn DJ, et al. A systematic review and meta-analysis of 
multidetector computed tomography in the assessment of coronary artery 
bypass grafts. Int J Cardiol. 2016;221:898–905.
 11. Small GR, Yam Y, Chen L, et al. Prognostic assessment of coronary artery 
bypass patients with 64-slice computed tomography angiography: anatomi-
cal information is incremental to clinical risk prediction. J Am Coll Cardiol. 
2011;58:2389–2395.
 12. Andreini D, Modolo R, Katagiri Y, et al. Impact of fractional flow reserve 
derived from coronary computed tomography angiography on heart team 
treatment decision-making in patients with multivessel coronary artery dis-
ease: insights from the SYNTAX III REVOLUTION trial. Circ Cardiovasc In-
terv. 2019;12:e007607 .
 13. Collet C, Onuma Y, Andreini D, et al. Coronary computed tomography an-
giography for heart team decision-making in multivessel coronary artery 
disease. Eur Heart J. 2018;39:3689–3698.
 14. Shaw LJ, Berman DS, Maron DJ, et al. Optimal medical therapy with or 
without percutaneous coronary intervention to reduce ischemic burden: 
results from the Clinical Outcomes Utilizing Revascularization and Ag-
gressive Drug Evaluation (COURAGE) trial nuclear substudy. Circulation. 
2008;117:1283–1291.
 15. Shaw LJ, Cerqueira MD, Brooks MM, et al. Impact of left ventricular function 
and the extent of ischemia and scar by stress myocardial perfusion imaging 
on prognosis and therapeutic risk reduction in diabetic patients with coro-
nary artery disease: results from the Bypass Angioplasty Revascularization 
Investigation 2 Diabetes (BARI 2D) trial. J Nucl Cardiol. 2012;19:658–669.
 16. Zellweger MJ, Fahrni G, Ritter M, et al. Prognostic value of "routine" cardiac 
stress imaging 5 years after percutaneous coronary intervention: the pro-
spective long-term observational BASKET (Basel Stent Kosteneffektivitats 
Trial) LATE IMAGING study. J Am Coll Cardiol Intv. 2014;7:615–621.
 17 . Zellweger MJ, Kaiser C, Jeger R, et al. Coronary artery disease progression 
late after successful stent implantation. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2012;59:793–
799. 18. Zellweger MJ, Kaiser C, Brunner-La Rocca HP, et al. Value and limitations 
of target-vessel ischemia in predicting late clinical events after drug-eluting 
stent implantation. J Nucl Med. 2008;49:550–556.
 19. Shaw LJ, Weintraub WS, Maron DJ, et al. Baseline stress myocardial perfu-
sion imaging results and outcomes in patients with stable ischemic heart 
disease randomized to optimal medical therapy with or without percutane-
ous coronary intervention. Am Heart J. 2012;164:243–250.
 20. Patel KK, Spertus JA, Arnold SV, et al. Ischemia on PET MPI may identify 
patients with improvement in angina and health status post-revasculariza-
tion. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2019;74:1734–1736.
 21. Patel KK, Spertus JA, Chan PS, et al. Extent of myocardial ischemia on posi-
tron emission tomography and survival benefit with early revascularization. J 
Am Coll Cardiol. 2019;74:1645–1654.
 22. Reynolds HR, Shaw LJ, Min JK, et al. Association of sex with severity of 
coronary artery disease, ischemia, and symptom burden in patients with 
moderate or severe ischemia: secondary analysis of the ISCHEMIA ran-
domized clinical trial. JAMA Cardiol. 2020;5:1–14.
 23. Schwitter J, Wacker CM, van Rossum AC, et al. MR-IMPACT: comparison 
of perfusion-cardiac magnetic resonance with single-photon emission com-
puted tomography for the detection of coronary artery disease in a multi-
centre, multivendor, randomized trial. Eur Heart J. 2008;29:480–489.
 24. Schwitter J, Wacker CM, Wilke N, et al. MR-IMPACT II: Magnetic resonance 
imaging for myocardial perfusion assessment in coronary artery disease 
trial: perfusion-cardiac magnetic resonance vs. single-photon emission 
computed tomography for the detection of coronary artery disease: a com-
parative multicentre, multivendor trial. Eur Heart J. 2013;34:775–781.
 25. Arai AE, Schulz-Menger J, Berman D, et al. Gadobutrol-enhanced cardiac 
magnetic resonance imaging for detection of coronary artery disease. J Am 
Coll Cardiol. 2020;76:1536–1547 .
 26. Takx RA, Blomberg BA, El Aidi H, et al. Diagnostic accuracy of stress 
myocardial perfusion imaging compared to invasive coronary angiogra-
phy with fractional flow reserve meta-analysis. Circ Cardiovasc Imaging. 
2015;8:e002666.
 27 . Heitner JF, Kim RJ, Kim HW, et al. Prognostic value of vasodilator stress car-
diac magnetic resonance imaging: a multicenter study with 48000 patient-
years of follow-up. JAMA Cardiol. 2019;4:256–264.
 28. Kato S, Saito N, Nakachi T, et al. Stress perfusion coronary flow reserve 
versus cardiac magnetic resonance for known or suspected CAD. J Am Coll 
Cardiol. 2017;70:869–879.
 29. Vincenti G, Masci PG, Monney P, et al. Stress perfusion CMR in patients with 
known and suspected CAD: prognostic value and optimal ischemic thresh-
old for revascularization. J Am Coll Cardiol Img. 2017;10:526–537 .
 30. Kwong RY, Ge Y, Steel K, et al. Cardiac magnetic resonance stress perfu-
sion imaging for evaluation of patients with chest pain. J Am Coll Cardiol. 
2019;74:1741–1755.
 31. Taqueti VR, Hachamovitch R, Murthy VL, et al. Global coronary flow reserve 
is associated with adverse cardiovascular events independently of luminal 
angiographic severity and modifies the effect of early revascularization. Cir-
culation. 2015;131:19–27 .
 32. Driessen RS, Danad I, Stuijfzand WJ, et al. Comparison of coronary comput-
ed tomography angiography, fractional flow reserve, and perfusion imaging 
for ischemia diagnosis. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2019;73:161–173.
 33. Danad I, Raijmakers PG, Driessen RS, et al. Comparison of coronary CT angiog-
raphy, SPECT, PET, and hybrid imaging for diagnosis of ischemic heart disease 
determined by fractional flow reserve. JAMA Cardiol. 2017;2:1100–1107 .
 34. Patel KK, Spertus JA, Chan PS, et al. Myocardial blood flow reserve as-
sessed by positron emission tomography myocardial perfusion imaging 
identifies patients with a survival benefit from early revascularization. Eur 
Heart J. 2020;41:759–768.
 35. Bom MJ, van Diemen PA, Driessen RS, et al. Prognostic value of [15O]
H2O positron emission tomography-derived global and regional myocardial 
perfusion. Eur Heart J Cardiovasc Imaging. 2020;21:777–786.
 36. Knott KD, Seraphim A, Augusto JB, et al. The prognostic significance of 
quantitative myocardial perfusion: an artificial intelligence-based approach 
using perfusion mapping. Circulation. 2020;141:1282–1291.
 37 . Patel KK, Al Badarin F, Chan PS, et al. Randomized comparison of clinical 
effectiveness of pharmacologic SPECT and PET MPI in symptomatic CAD 
patients. J Am Coll Cardiol Img. 2019;12:1821–1831.
 38. Ho PM, Rumsfeld JS, Peterson PN, et al. Chest pain on exercise tread-
mill test predicts future cardiac hospitalizations. Clin Cardiol. 2007;30: 
505–510.
 39. Hambrecht R, Walther C, Mobius-Winkler S, et al. Percutaneous coronary 
angioplasty compared with exercise training in patients with stable coronary 
artery disease: a randomized trial. Circulation. 2004;109:1371–1378.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on November 12, 2025

Circulation. 2021;144:e368–e454. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000001029 November 30, 2021 e441
Gulati et al 2021 Chest Pain GuidelineCLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINES 40. Jaureguizar KV, Vicente-Campos D, Bautista LR, et al. Effect of high-inten-
sity interval versus continuous exercise training on functional capacity and 
quality of life in patients with coronary artery disease: a randomized clinical 
trial. J Cardiopulm Rehabil Prev. 2016;36:96–105.
 41. Spertus JA, Jones PG, Maron DJ, et al. Health status after invasive or con-
servative care in coronary and advanced kidney disease. N Engl J Med. 
2020;382:1619–1628.
 42. Xaplanteris P, Fournier S, Pijls NHJ, et al. Five-year outcomes with PCI 
guided by fractional flow reserve. N Engl J Med. 2018;379:250–259.
 43. Lee S-E, Sung JM, Andreini D, et al. Differences in progression to obstruc-
tive lesions per high-risk plaque features and plaque volumes with CCTA. J 
Am Coll Cardiol Img. 2019;13:1409–1417 .
 44. Lee SE, Chang HJ, Sung JM, et al. Effects of statins on coronary ath-
erosclerotic plaques: the PARADIGM study. J Am Coll Cardiol Img. 
2018;11:1475–1484.
 45. Williams MC, Hunter A, Shah ASV, et al. Use of coronary computed tomo-
graphic angiography to guide management of patients with coronary dis-
ease. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2016;67:1759–1768.
 46. Ladapo JA, Hoffmann U, Lee KL, et al. Changes in medical therapy and 
lifestyle after anatomical or functional testing for coronary artery disease. J 
Am Heart Assoc. 2016;5:e003807 .
 47 . Mark DB, Anstrom KJ, Sheng S, et al. Quality-of-life outcomes with ana-
tomic versus functional diagnostic testing strategies in symptomatic pa-
tients with suspected coronary artery disease: results from the PROMISE 
randomized trial. Circulation. 2016;133:1995–2007 .
 48. Sharma A, Coles A, Sekaran NK, et al. Stress testing versus CT angiography 
in patients with diabetes and suspected coronary artery disease. J Am Coll 
Cardiol. 2019;73:893–902.
 49. SCOT-HEART Investigators. Coronary CT angiography and 5-year risk of 
myocardial infarction. N Engl J Med. 2018;379:924–933.
 50. Adamson PD, Williams MC, Dweck MR, et al. Guiding therapy by coronary 
CT angiography improves outcomes in patients with stable chest pain. J Am 
Coll Cardiol. 2019;74:2058–2070.
 51. Budoff MJ, Dowe D, Jollis JG, et al. Diagnostic performance of 64-mul-
tidetector row coronary computed tomographic angiography for evalu-
ation of coronary artery stenosis in individuals without known coronary 
artery disease: results from the prospective multicenter ACCURACY (As-
sessment by Coronary Computed Tomographic Angiography of Individu-
als Undergoing Invasive Coronary Angiography) trial. J Am Coll Cardiol. 
2008;52:1724–1732.
 52. Meijboom WB, Meijs MF, Schuijf JD, et al. Diagnostic accuracy of 64-slice 
computed tomography coronary angiography: a prospective, multicenter, 
multivendor study. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2008;52:2135–2144.
 53. Miller JM, Rochitte CE, Dewey M, et al. Diagnostic performance of coronary 
angiography by 64-row CT. N Engl J Med. 2008;359:2324–2336.
 54. Neglia D, Rovai D, Caselli C, et al. Detection of significant coronary artery 
disease by noninvasive anatomical and functional imaging. Circ Cardiovasc 
Imaging. 2015;8:e002179.
 55. Budoff MJ, Li D, Kazerooni EA, et al. Diagnostic accuracy of noninvasive 
64-row computed tomographic coronary angiography (CCTA) compared 
with myocardial perfusion imaging (MPI): the PICTURE study, a prospective 
multicenter trial. Acad Radiol. 2017;24:22–29.
 56. Xie JX, Eshtehardi P, Varghese T, et al. Prognostic significance of nonob-
structive left main coronary artery disease in women versus men: long-term 
outcomes from the CONFIRM (Coronary CT Angiography Evaluation For 
Clinical Outcomes: An International Multicenter) Registry. Circ Cardiovasc 
Imaging. 2017;10:e006246.
 57 . Min JK, Dunning A, Lin FY, et al. Age- and sex-related differences in all-
cause mortality risk based on coronary computed tomography angiography 
findings results from the International Multicenter CONFIRM (Coronary CT 
Angiography Evaluation for Clinical Outcomes: An International Multicenter 
Registry) of 23 854 patients without known coronary artery disease. J Am 
Coll Cardiol. 2011;58:849–860.
 58. Fihn SD, Blankenship JC, Alexander KP, et al. 2014 ACC/AHA/AATS/
PCNA/SCAI/STS focused update of the guideline for the diagnosis and 
management of patients with stable ischemic heart disease: a report of the 
American College of Cardiology/American Heart Association Task Force 
on Practice Guidelines, and the American Association for Thoracic Surgery, 
Preventive Cardiovascular Nurses Association, Society for Cardiovascular 
Angiography and Interventions, and Society of Thoracic Surgeons. Circula-
tion. 2014;130:1749–1767 .
 59. Norgaard BL, Leipsic J, Gaur S, et al. Diagnostic performance of noninva-
sive fractional flow reserve derived from coronary computed tomography 
angiography in suspected coronary artery disease: the NXT trial (Analysis of Coronary Blood Flow Using CT Angiography: Next Steps) J Am Coll Cardiol. 
2014;63:1145–1155.
 60. Min JK, Leipsic J, Pencina MJ, et al. Diagnostic accuracy of fractional flow 
reserve from anatomic CT angiography. JAMA. 2012;308:1237–1245.
 61. Douglas PS, Pontone G, Hlatky MA, et al. Clinical outcomes of fractional 
flow reserve by computed tomographic angiography-guided diagnostic 
strategies vs. usual care in patients with suspected coronary artery disease: 
the prospective longitudinal trial of FFR(CT): outcome and resource impacts 
study. Eur Heart J. 2015;36:3359–3367 .
 62. Patel MR, Norgaard BL, Fairbairn TA, et al. 1-Y ear impact on medical prac-
tice and clinical outcomes of FFRCT: the ADVANCE registry. J Am Coll 
Cardiol Img. 2019;13:97–105.
 63. Hachamovitch R, Rozanski A, Hayes SW, et al. Predicting therapeutic benefit 
from myocardial revascularization procedures: are measurements of both 
resting left ventricular ejection fraction and stress-induced myocardial isch-
emia necessary? J Nucl Cardiol. 2006;13:768–778.
 64. Hachamovitch R, Hayes SW, Friedman JD, et al. Comparison of the short-
term survival benefit associated with revascularization compared with medi-
cal therapy in patients with no prior coronary artery disease undergoing 
stress myocardial perfusion single photon emission computed tomography. 
Circulation. 2003;107:2900–2907 .
 65. Hachamovitch R, Rozanski A, Shaw LJ, et al. Impact of ischaemia and scar 
on the therapeutic benefit derived from myocardial revascularization vs. 
medical therapy among patients undergoing stress-rest myocardial perfu-
sion scintigraphy. Eur Heart J. 2011;32:1012–1024.
 66. Shaw LJ, Vasey C, Sawada S, et al. Impact of gender on risk stratification 
by exercise and dobutamine stress echocardiography: long-term mortality in 
4234 women and 6898 men. Eur Heart J. 2005;26:447–456.
 67 . Yao SS, Bangalore S, Chaudhry FA. Prognostic implications of stress echo-
cardiography and impact on patient outcomes: an effective gatekeeper 
for coronary angiography and revascularization. Am Soc Echocardiogr. 
2010;23:832–839.
 68. Al-Lamee R, Thompson D, Dehbi HM, et al. Percutaneous coronary inter-
vention in stable angina (ORBITA): a double-blind, randomised controlled 
trial. Lancet. 2018;391:31–40.
 69. Al-Lamee RK, Shun-Shin MJ, Howard JP, et al. Dobutamine stress echo-
cardiography ischemia as a predictor of the placebo-controlled efficacy 
of percutaneous coronary intervention in stable coronary artery disease: 
the stress echocardiography-stratified analysis of ORBITA. Circulation. 
2019;140:1971–1980.
 70. Taqueti VR, Shaw LJ, Cook NR, et al. Excess cardiovascular risk in women 
relative to men referred for coronary angiography is associated with se-
verely impaired coronary flow reserve, not obstructive disease. Circulation. 
2017;135:566–577 .
 71. Taqueti VR, Solomon SD, Shah AM, et al. Coronary microvascular dysfunc-
tion and future risk of heart failure with preserved ejection fraction. Eur 
Heart J. 2018;39:840–849.
5.2.1.1. Patients With Prior Coronary Artery Bypass 
With Stable Chest Pain
 1. Fihn SD, Blankenship JC, Alexander KP, et al. 2014 ACC/AHA/AATS/
PCNA/SCAI/STS focused update of the guideline for the diagnosis and 
management of patients with stable ischemic heart disease: a report of the 
American College of Cardiology/American Heart Association Task Force 
on Practice Guidelines, and the American Association for Thoracic Surgery, 
Preventive Cardiovascular Nurses Association, Society for Cardiovascular 
Angiography and Interventions, and Society of Thoracic Surgeons. Circula-
tion. 2014;130:1749–1767 .
 2. Hammermeister KE, DeRouen TA, Dodge HT. Variables predictive of survival 
in patients with coronary disease. Selection by univariate and multivariate 
analyses from the clinical, electrocardiographic, exercise, arteriographic, and 
quantitative angiographic evaluations. Circulation. 1979;59:421–430.
 3. Mark DB, Hlatky MA, Harrell FE Jr, et al. Exercise treadmill score for predicting 
prognosis in coronary artery disease. Ann Intern Med. 1987;106:793–800.
 4. Levine GN, Bates ER, Blankenship JC, et al. 2011 ACCF/AHA/SCAI 
guideline for percutaneous coronary intervention: a report of the American 
College of Cardiology Foundation/American Heart Association Task Force 
on Practice Guidelines and the Society for Cardiovascular Angiography and 
Interventions. Circulation. 2011;124:e574–e651.
 5. Hillis LD, Smith PK, Anderson JL, et al. 2011 ACCF/AHA guideline for 
coronary artery bypass graft surgery: a report of the American College of 
Cardiology Foundation/American Heart Association Task Force on Practice 
Guidelines. Circulation. 2011;124:e652–e735.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on November 12, 2025

November 30, 2021 Circulation. 2021;144:e368–e454. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000001029 e442
Gulati et al 2021 Chest Pain GuidelineCLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINES 6. Patel MR, Bailey SR, Bonow RO, et al. ACCF/SCAI/AATS/AHA/ASE/ASNC/
HFSA/HRS/SCCM/SCCT/SCMR/STS 2012 appropriate use criteria for 
diagnostic catheterization: a report of the American College of Cardiology 
Foundation Appropriate Use Criteria Task Force, Society for Cardiovascular 
Angiography and Interventions, American Association for Thoracic Surgery, 
American Heart Association, American Society of Echocardiography, Ameri-
can Society of Nuclear Cardiology, Heart Failure Society of America, Heart 
Rhythm Society, Society of Critical Care Medicine, Society of Cardiovascular 
Computed Tomography, Society for Cardiovascular Magnetic Resonance, and 
Society of Thoracic Surgeons. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2012;59:1995–2027 .
 7 . Bittl JA, He Y, Jacobs AK, et al. Bayesian methods affirm the use of percuta-
neous coronary intervention to improve survival in patients with unprotected 
left main coronary artery disease. Circulation. 2013;127:2177–2185.
 8. Fitzgibbon GM, Kafka HP, Leach AJ, et al. Coronary bypass graft fate and 
patient outcome: angiographic follow-up of 5 065 grafts related to sur-
vival and reoperation in 1 388 patients during 25 years. J Am Coll Cardiol. 
1996;28:616–626.
 9. Harskamp RE, Lopes RD, Baisden CE, et al. Saphenous vein graft failure 
after coronary artery bypass surgery: pathophysiology, management, and 
future directions. Ann Surg. 2013;257:824–833.
 10. Wolk MJ, Bailey SR, Doherty JU, et al. ACCF/AHA/ASE/ASNC/HFSA/
HRS/SCAI/SCCT/SCMR/STS 2013 multimodality appropriate use criteria 
for the detection and risk assessment of stable ischemic heart disease: a 
report of the American College of Cardiology Foundation Appropriate Use 
Criteria Task Force, American Heart Association, American Society of Echo-
cardiography, American Society of Nuclear Cardiology, Heart Failure Society 
of America, Heart Rhythm Society, Society for Cardiovascular Angiography 
and Interventions, Society of Cardiovascular Computed Tomography, Soci-
ety for Cardiovascular Magnetic Resonance, and Society of Thoracic Sur-
geons. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2014;63:380–406.
 11. Taylor AJ, Cerqueira M, Hodgson JM, et al. ACCF/SCCT/ACR/AHA/ASE/
ASNC/NASCI/SCAI/SCMR 2010 appropriate use criteria for cardiac com-
puted tomography: a report of the American College of Cardiology Foundation 
Appropriate Use Criteria Task Force, the Society of Cardiovascular Computed 
Tomography, the American College of Radiology, the American Heart Asso-
ciation, the American Society of Echocardiography, the American Society of 
Nuclear Cardiology, the North American Society for Cardiovascular Imaging, 
the Society for Cardiovascular Angiography and Interventions, and the Society 
for Cardiovascular Magnetic Resonance. Circulation. 2010;122:e525–e555.
 12. Sabik JF 3rd. Understanding saphenous vein graft patency. Circulation. 
2011;124:273–275.
 13. Taggart DP. Current status of arterial grafts for coronary artery bypass graft-
ing. Ann Cardiothorac Surg. 2013;2:427–430.
 14. Gaudino M, Benedetto U, Fremes S, et al. Radial-artery or saphenous-vein grafts 
in coronary-artery bypass surgery. N Engl J Med. 2018;378:2069–2077 .
 15. Barbero U, Iannaccone M, d'Ascenzo F, et al. 64 slice-coronary computed 
tomography sensitivity and specificity in the evaluation of coronary artery 
bypass graft stenosis: a meta-analysis. Int J Cardiol. 2016;216:52–57 .
5.2.2. Patients With Known Nonobstructive CAD 
Presenting With Stable Chest Pain
 1. Lee SE, Chang HJ, Sung JM, et al. Effects of statins on coronary atheroscle-
rotic plaques: the PARADIGM study. J Am Coll Cardiol Img. 2018;11:1475–
1484.
 2. Lee SE, Sung JM, Rizvi A, et al. Quantification of coronary atherosclero-
sis in the assessment of coronary artery disease. Circ Cardiovasc Imaging. 
2018;11:e007562.
 3. Hoffmann U, Ferencik M, Udelson JE, et al. Prognostic value of noninvasive 
cardiovascular testing in patients with stable chest pain: insights from the 
PROMISE trial (Prospective Multicenter Imaging Study for Evaluation of 
Chest Pain) Circulation. 2017;135:2320–2332.
 4. Williams MC, Kwiecinski J, Doris M, et al. Low-attenuation noncalcified 
plaque on coronary computed tomography angiography predicts myocardial 
infarction: results from the Multicenter SCOT-HEART Trial (Scottish Com-
puted Tomography of the HEART) Circulation. 2020;141:1452–1462.
 5. Ferencik M, Mayrhofer T, Bittner DO, et al. Use of high-risk coronary athero-
sclerotic plaque detection for risk stratification of patients with stable chest 
pain: a secondary analysis of the PROMISE randomized clinical trial. JAMA 
Cardiol. 2018;3:144–152.
 6. Chang HJ, Lin FY, Lee SE, et al. Coronary atherosclerotic precursors of 
acute coronary syndromes. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2018;71:2511–2522.
 7 . Motoyama S, Ito H, Sarai M, et al. Plaque characterization by coronary com-
puted tomography angiography and the likelihood of acute coronary events 
in mid-term follow-up. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2015;66:337–346. 8. Douglas PS, Pontone G, Hlatky MA, et al. Clinical outcomes of fractional 
flow reserve by computed tomographic angiography-guided diagnostic 
strategies vs. usual care in patients with suspected coronary artery disease: 
the prospective longitudinal trial of FFR(CT): outcome and resource impacts 
study. Eur Heart J. 2015;36:3359–3367 .
 9. Douglas PS, De Bruyne B, Pontone G, et al. 1-year outcomes of FFRCT-
guided care in patients with suspected coronary disease: the PLATFORM 
Study. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2016;68:435–445.
 10. Fairbairn TA, Nieman K, Akasaka T, et al. Real-world clinical utility and im-
pact on clinical decision-making of coronary computed tomography angiog-
raphy-derived fractional flow reserve: lessons from the ADVANCE Registry. 
Eur Heart J. 2018;39:3701–3711.
 11. Patel MR, Norgaard BL, Fairbairn TA, et al. 1-Y ear impact on medical prac-
tice and clinical outcomes of FFRCT: the ADVANCE registry. J Am Coll 
Cardiol Img. 2019;13:97–105.
 12. Min JK, Leipsic J, Pencina MJ, et al. Diagnostic accuracy of fractional flow 
reserve from anatomic CT angiography. JAMA. 2012;308:1237–1245.
 13. Norgaard BL, Leipsic J, Gaur S, et al. Diagnostic performance of noninva-
sive fractional flow reserve derived from coronary computed tomography 
angiography in suspected coronary artery disease: the NXT trial (Analysis of 
Coronary Blood Flow Using CT Angiography: Next Steps) J Am Coll Cardiol. 
2014;63:1145–1155.
 14. Andreini D, Modolo R, Katagiri Y, et al. Impact of fractional flow reserve 
derived from coronary computed tomography angiography on heart team 
treatment decision-making in patients with multivessel coronary artery dis-
ease: insights from the SYNTAX III REVOLUTION trial. Circ Cardiovasc In-
terv. 2019;12:e007607 .
 15. Taqueti VR, Solomon SD, Shah AM, et al. Coronary microvascular dysfunc-
tion and future risk of heart failure with preserved ejection fraction. Eur 
Heart J. 2018;39:840–849.
 16. Taqueti VR, Shaw LJ, Cook NR, et al. Excess cardiovascular risk in women 
relative to men referred for coronary angiography is associated with se-
verely impaired coronary flow reserve, not obstructive disease. Circulation. 
2017;135:566–577 .
 17 . Taqueti VR, Hachamovitch R, Murthy VL, et al. Global coronary flow reserve 
is associated with adverse cardiovascular events independently of luminal 
angiographic severity and modifies the effect of early revascularization. Cir-
culation. 2015;131:19–27 .
 18. Driessen RS, Danad I, Stuijfzand WJ, et al. Comparison of coronary comput-
ed tomography angiography, fractional flow reserve, and perfusion imaging 
for ischemia diagnosis. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2019;73:161–173.
 19. Danad I, Raijmakers PG, Driessen RS, et al. Comparison of coronary CT angiog-
raphy, SPECT, PET, and hybrid imaging for diagnosis of ischemic heart disease 
determined by fractional flow reserve. JAMA Cardiol. 2017;2:1100–1107 .
 20. Patel KK, Spertus JA, Chan PS, et al. Myocardial blood flow reserve as-
sessed by positron emission tomography myocardial perfusion imaging 
identifies patients with a survival benefit from early revascularization. Eur 
Heart J. 2020;41:759–768.
 21. Bom MJ, van Diemen PA, Driessen RS, et al. Prognostic value of [15O]
H2O positron emission tomography-derived global and regional myocardial 
perfusion. Eur Heart J Cardiovasc Imaging. 2020;21:777–786.
 22. Kato S, Saito N, Nakachi T, et al. Stress perfusion coronary flow reserve 
versus cardiac magnetic resonance for known or suspected CAD. J Am Coll 
Cardiol. 2017;70:869–879.
 23. Indorkar R, Kwong RY, Romano S, et al. Global coronary flow reserve mea-
sured during stress cardiac magnetic resonance imaging Is an indepen-
dent predictor of adverse cardiovascular events. J Am Coll Cardiol Img. 
2019;12:1686–1695.
 24. Zorach B, Shaw PW, Bourque J, et al. Quantitative cardiovascular magnetic 
resonance perfusion imaging identifies reduced flow reserve in microvascu-
lar coronary artery disease. J Cardiovasc Magn Reson. 2018;20:14.
 25. Puchner SB, Liu T, Mayrhofer T, et al. High-risk plaque detected on coronary 
CT angiography predicts acute coronary syndromes independent of signifi-
cant stenosis in acute chest pain: results from the ROMICAT-II trial. J Am 
Coll Cardiol. 2014;64:684–692.
 26. Fihn SD, Gardin JM, Abrams J, et al. 2012 ACCF/AHA/ACP/AATS/
PCNA/SCAI/STS guideline for the diagnosis and management of patients 
with stable ischemic heart disease: a report of the American College of 
Cardiology Foundation/American Heart Association Task Force on Practice 
Guidelines, and the American College of Physicians, American Association 
for Thoracic Surgery, Preventive Cardiovascular Nurses Association, Society 
for Cardiovascular Angiography and Interventions, and Society of Thoracic 
Surgeons. Circulation. 2012;126:e354–e471.
 27 . Grundy SM, Stone NJ, Bailey AL, et al. 2018 AHA/ACC/AACVPR/AAPA/
ABC/ACPM/ADA/AGS/APhA/ASPC/NLA/PCNA guideline on the man-
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on November 12, 2025

Circulation. 2021;144:e368–e454. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000001029 November 30, 2021 e443
Gulati et al 2021 Chest Pain GuidelineCLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINESagement of blood cholesterol: a report of the American College of Cardiol-
ogy/American Heart Association Task Force on Clinical Practice Guidelines. 
Circulation. 2019;139:e1082–e1143
 28. Fihn SD, Blankenship JC, Alexander KP, et al. 2014 ACC/AHA/AATS/
PCNA/SCAI/STS focused update of the guideline for the diagnosis and 
management of patients with stable ischemic heart disease: a report of the 
American College of Cardiology/American Heart Association Task Force 
on Practice Guidelines, and the American Association for Thoracic Surgery, 
Preventive Cardiovascular Nurses Association, Society for Cardiovascular 
Angiography and Interventions, and Society of Thoracic Surgeons. Circula-
tion. 2014;130:1749–1767 .
 29. Arnett DK, Blumenthal R, Albert M, et al. 2019 ACC/AHA guideline on 
the primary prevention of cardiovascular disease: a report of the American 
College of Cardiology/American Heart Association Task Force on Clinical 
Practice Guidelines. Circulation. 2019;140:e596–e646.
 30. Motoyama S, Sarai M, Harigaya H, et al. Computed tomographic angiog-
raphy characteristics of atherosclerotic plaques subsequently resulting in 
acute coronary syndrome. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2009;54:49–57 .
 31. Stuijfzand WJ, van Rosendael AR, Lin FY, et al. Stress myocardial perfu-
sion imaging vs coronary computed tomographic angiography for diag-
nosis of invasive vessel-specific coronary physiology: predictive model-
ing results from the computed tomographic evaluation of atherosclerotic 
determinants of myocardial ischemia (CREDENCE) Trial. JAMA Cardiol. 
2020;5:1338–1348.
5.2.3. Patients With Suspected Ischemia and No 
Obstructive CAD (INOCA)
 1. Bairey Merz CN, Pepine CJ, Walsh MN, et al. Ischemia and no obstructive 
coronary artery disease (INOCA): developing evidence-based therapies and 
research agenda for the next decade. Circulation. 2017;135:1075–1092.
 2. AlBadri A, Bairy Merz CN, Johnson BD, et al. Impact of abnormal coro-
nary reactivity on long-term clinical outcomes in women. J Am Coll Cardiol. 
2019;73:684–693.
 3. AlBadri A, Sharif B, Wei J, et al. Intracoronary bolus injection versus intrave-
nous infusion of adenosine for assessment of coronary flow velocity reserve 
in women with signs and symptoms of myocardial ischemia and no obstruc-
tive coronary artery disease. J Am Coll Cardiol Intv. 2018;11:2125–2127 .
 4. Ford T J, Stanley B, Sidik N, et al. 1-Y ear outcomes of angina management 
guided by invasive coronary function testing (CorMicA) J Am Coll Cardiol 
Intv. 2020;13:33–45.
 5. Taqueti VR, Solomon SD, Shah AM, et al. Coronary microvascular dysfunc-
tion and future risk of heart failure with preserved ejection fraction. Eur 
Heart J. 2018;39:840–849.
 6. Taqueti VR, Shaw LJ, Cook NR, et al. Excess cardiovascular risk in women 
relative to men referred for coronary angiography is associated with se-
verely impaired coronary flow reserve, not obstructive disease. Circulation. 
2017;135:566–577 .
 7 . Taqueti VR, Hachamovitch R, Murthy VL, et al. Global coronary flow reserve 
is associated with adverse cardiovascular events independently of luminal 
angiographic severity and modifies the effect of early revascularization. Cir-
culation. 2015;131:19–27 .
 8. Driessen RS, Danad I, Stuijfzand WJ, et al. Comparison of coronary comput-
ed tomography angiography, fractional flow reserve, and perfusion imaging 
for ischemia diagnosis. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2019;73:161–173.
 9. Danad I, Raijmakers PG, Driessen RS, et al. Comparison of coronary CT angiog-
raphy, SPECT, PET, and hybrid imaging for diagnosis of ischemic heart disease 
determined by fractional flow reserve. JAMA Cardiol. 2017;2:1100–1107 .
 10. Patel KK, Spertus JA, Chan PS, et al. Myocardial blood flow reserve as-
sessed by positron emission tomography myocardial perfusion imaging 
identifies patients with a survival benefit from early revascularization. Eur 
Heart J. 2020;41:759–768.
 11. Bom MJ, van Diemen PA, Driessen RS, et al. Prognostic value of [15O]
H2O positron emission tomography-derived global and regional myocardial 
perfusion. Eur Heart J Cardiovasc Imaging. 2020;21:777–786.
 12. Kato S, Saito N, Nakachi T, et al. Stress perfusion coronary flow reserve 
versus cardiac magnetic resonance for known or suspected CAD. J Am Coll 
Cardiol. 2017;70:869–879.
 13. Indorkar R, Kwong RY, Romano S, et al. Global coronary flow reserve mea-
sured during stress cardiac magnetic resonance imaging Is an indepen-
dent predictor of adverse cardiovascular events. J Am Coll Cardiol Img. 
2019;12:1686–1695.
 14. Zorach B, Shaw PW, Bourque J, et al. Quantitative cardiovascular magnetic 
resonance perfusion imaging identifies reduced flow reserve in microvascu-
lar coronary artery disease. J Cardiovasc Magn Reson. 2018;20:14. 15. Pepine CJ, Ferdinand KC, Shaw LJ, et al. Emergence of nonobstructive cor-
onary artery disease: a woman's problem and need for change in definition 
on angiography. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2015;66:1918–1933.
 16. Ford T J, Corcoran D, Sidik N, et al. Coronary microvascular dysfunc-
tion: assessment of both structure and function. J Am Coll Cardiol. 
2018;72:584–586.
 17 . Gupta A, Taqueti VR, van de Hoef TP, et al. Integrated noninvasive physi-
ological assessment of coronary circulatory function and impact on cardio-
vascular mortality in patients with stable coronary artery disease. Circulation. 
2017;136:2325–2336.
 18. Murthy VL, Bateman TM, Beanlands RS, et al. Clinical quantification of myo-
cardial blood flow using PET: joint position paper of the SNMMI cardiovas-
cular council and the ASNC. J Nucl Cardiol. 2018;25:269–297 .
 19. Kotecha T, Martinez-Naharro A, Boldrini M, et al. Automated pixel-wise 
quantitative myocardial perfusion mapping by CMR to detect obstruc-
tive coronary artery disease and coronary microvascular dysfunction: 
validation against invasive coronary physiology. J Am Coll Cardiol Img. 
2019;12:1958–1969.
 20. Engblom H, Xue H, Akil S, et al. Fully quantitative cardiovascular magnetic 
resonance myocardial perfusion ready for clinical use: a comparison be-
tween cardiovascular magnetic resonance imaging and positron emission 
tomography. J Cardiovasc Magn Reson. 2017;19:78.
 21. Sicari R, Rigo F, Cortigiani L, et al. Additive prognostic value of coronary flow 
reserve in patients with chest pain syndrome and normal or near-normal 
coronary arteries. Am J Cardiol. 2009;103:626–631.
5.3. Cost-Value Considerations in Diagnostic 
Testing
5.3.1. CCTA and CAC Scanning Cost-Value 
Considerations
 1. Mark DB, Federspiel JJ, Cowper PA, et al. Economic outcomes with ana-
tomical versus functional diagnostic testing for coronary artery disease. Ann 
Intern Med. 2016;165:94–102.
 2. Lubbers M, Dedic A, Coenen A, et al. Calcium imaging and selective com-
puted tomography angiography in comparison to functional testing for sus-
pected coronary artery disease: the multicentre, randomized CRESCENT 
trial. Eur Heart J. 2016;37:1232–1243.
 3. Chang HJ, Lin FY, Gebow D, et al. Selective referral using CCTA versus 
direct referral for individuals referred to invasive coronary angiography for 
suspected CAD: a randomized, controlled, open-label trial. J Am Coll Cardiol 
Img. 2019;12:1303–1312.
 4. Lubbers M, Coenen A, Kofflard M, et al. Comprehensive cardiac CT with 
myocardial perfusion imaging versus functional testing in suspected coro-
nary artery disease: the multicenter randomized CRESCENT-II trial. J Am 
Coll Cardiol Img. 2018;11:1625–1636.
5.3.2. Exercise Electrocardiographic Cost-Value 
Considerations
 1. Gurunathan S, Zacharias K, Akhtar M, et al. Cost-effectiveness of a 
management strategy based on exercise echocardiography versus ex-
ercise electrocardiography in patients presenting with suspected an-
gina during long term follow up: a randomized study. Int J Cardiol. 2018; 
259:1–7 .
 2. Genders TS, Petersen SE, Pugliese F, et al. The optimal imaging strategy 
for patients with stable chest pain: a cost-effectiveness analysis. Ann Intern 
Med. 2015;162:474–484.
 3. Shreibati JB, Baker LC, Hlatky MA. Association of coronary CT angiography 
or stress testing with subsequent utilization and spending among Medicare 
beneficiaries. JAMA. 2011;306:2128–2136.
 4. Mark DB, Federspiel JJ, Cowper PA, et al. Economic outcomes with ana-
tomical versus functional diagnostic testing for coronary artery disease. Ann 
Intern Med. 2016;165:94–102.
 5. Douglas PS, Hoffmann U, Patel MR, et al. Outcomes of anatomi-
cal versus functional testing for coronary artery disease. N Engl J Med. 
2015;372:1291–1300.
 6. Shaw LJ, Mieres JH, Hendel RH, et al. Comparative effectiveness of 
exercise electrocardiography with or without myocardial perfusion 
single photon emission computed tomography in women with sus-
pected coronary artery disease: results from the What Is the Optimal 
Method for Ischemia Evaluation in Women (WOMEN) trial. Circulation. 
2011;124:1239–1249.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on November 12, 2025

November 30, 2021 Circulation. 2021;144:e368–e454. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000001029 e444
Gulati et al 2021 Chest Pain GuidelineCLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINES5.3.3. Stress Echocardiographic Cost-Value 
Considerations
 1. Marwick TH, Shaw L, Case C, et al. Clinical and economic impact of exercise 
electrocardiography and exercise echocardiography in clinical practice. Eur 
Heart J. 2003;24:1153–1163.
 2. Kuntz KM, Fleischmann KE, Hunink MG, et al. Cost-effectiveness 
of diagnostic strategies for patients with chest pain. Ann Intern Med. 
1999;130:709–718.
 3. Genders TS, Petersen SE, Pugliese F, et al. The optimal imaging strategy 
for patients with stable chest pain: a cost-effectiveness analysis. Ann Intern 
Med. 2015;162:474–484.
 4. Kim C, Kwok YS, Saha S, et al. Diagnosis of suspected coronary artery dis-
ease in women: a cost-effectiveness analysis. Am Heart J. 1999;137:1019–
1027 .
 5. van Waardhuizen CN, Khanji MY, Genders TSS, et al. Comparative cost-
effectiveness of non-invasive imaging tests in patients presenting with 
chronic stable chest pain with suspected coronary artery disease: a system-
atic review. Eur Heart J Qual Care Clin Outcomes. 2016;2:245–260.
 6. Gurunathan S, Zacharias K, Akhtar M, et al. Cost-effectiveness of a man-
agement strategy based on exercise echocardiography versus exercise 
electrocardiography in patients presenting with suspected angina during 
long term follow up: a randomized study. Int J Cardiol. 2018;259:1–7 .
 7 . Mark DB, Federspiel JJ, Cowper PA, et al. Economic outcomes with ana-
tomical versus functional diagnostic testing for coronary artery disease. Ann 
Intern Med. 2016;165:94–102.
5.3.4. Stress Nuclear MPI Cost-Value 
Considerations
 1. van Waardhuizen CN, Khanji MY, Genders TSS, et al. Comparative cost-
effectiveness of non-invasive imaging tests in patients presenting with 
chronic stable chest pain with suspected coronary artery disease: a system-
atic review. Eur Heart J Qual Care Clin Outcomes. 2016;2:245–260.
 2. Hlatky MA, Shilane D, Hachamovitch R, et al. Economic outcomes in the 
Study of Myocardial Perfusion and Coronary Anatomy Imaging Roles in 
Coronary Artery Disease registry: the SPARC Study. J Am Coll Cardiol. 
2014;63:1002–1008.
 3. Douglas PS, Hoffmann U, Patel MR, et al. Outcomes of anatomi-
cal versus functional testing for coronary artery disease. N Engl J Med. 
2015;372:1291–1300.
 4. Sabharwal NK, Stoykova B, Taneja AK, et al. A randomized trial of exercise 
treadmill ECG versus stress SPECT myocardial perfusion imaging as an 
initial diagnostic strategy in stable patients with chest pain and suspected 
CAD: cost analysis. J Nucl Cardiol. 2007;14:174–186.
 5. Thom H, West NE, Hughes V, et al. Cost-effectiveness of initial stress car-
diovascular MR, stress SPECT or stress echocardiography as a gate-keeper 
test, compared with upfront invasive coronary angiography in the investiga-
tion and management of patients with stable chest pain: mid-term outcomes 
from the CECaT randomised controlled trial. BMJ Open. 2014;4:e003419.
5.3.5. Stress CMR Cost-Value Considerations
 1. Pletscher M, Walker S, Moschetti K, et al. Cost-effectiveness of functional 
cardiac imaging in the diagnostic work-up of coronary heart disease. Eur 
Heart J Qual Care Clin Outcomes. 2016;2:201–207 . 2. Walker S, Girardin F, McKenna C, et al. Cost-effectiveness of cardiovascular 
magnetic resonance in the diagnosis of coronary heart disease: an econom-
ic evaluation using data from the CE-MARC study. Heart. 2013;99:873–
881.
 3. Moschetti K, Muzzarelli S, Pinget C, et al. Cost evaluation of cardiovascular 
magnetic resonance versus coronary angiography for the diagnostic work-
up of coronary artery disease: application of the European Cardiovascu-
lar Magnetic Resonance registry data to the German, United Kingdom, 
Swiss, and United States health care systems. J Cardiovasc Magn Reson. 
2012;14:35.
 4. Kwong RY, Ge Y, Steel K, et al. Cardiac magnetic resonance stress perfu-
sion imaging for evaluation of patients with chest pain. J Am Coll Cardiol. 
2019;74:1741–1755.
 5. Ge Y, Pandya A, Steel K, et al. Cost-effectiveness analysis of stress cardio-
vascular magnetic resonance imaging for stable chest pain syndromes. J 
Am Coll Cardiol Img. 2020;13:1505–1517 .
6. EVIDENCE GAPS AND FUTURE 
RESEARCH
 1. Wang X, Bhatt DL. COVID-19: an unintended force for medical revolution? 
J Invasive Cardiol. 2020;32:E81–E82.
 2. Roux S, Bhatt DL. Self-treatment for acute coronary syndrome: why not? 
Eur Heart J. 2020;41:2144–2145.
 3. Tamis-Holland JE, Jneid H, Reynolds HR, et al. Contemporary diagnosis and 
management of patients with myocardial infarction in the absence of ob-
structive coronary artery disease: a scientific statement from the American 
Heart Association. Circulation. 2019;139:e891–e908.
 4. Gulati M, Shaw LJ. Bairey Merz CN. Myocardial ischemia in women: lessons 
from the NHLBI WISE study. Clin Cardiol. 2012;35:141–148.
 5. Herscovici R, Sedlak T, Wei J, et al. Ischemia and no obstructive coro-
nary artery disease (INOCA): what is the risk? J Am Heart Assoc. 2018;  
7:e008868.
 6. Mukherjee D. Myocardial infarction with nonobstructive coronary arteries: a 
call for individualized treatment. J Am Heart Assoc. 2019;8:e013361.
 7 . Kreatsoulas C, Dinakar D, Mehta S, et al. Machine learning to evaluate gen-
der differences in typical and atypical angina among patients with obstruc-
tive coronary artery disease. ESC Congress 2019. Paris, France. 2019.
 8. Bhatt DL, Taqueti VR. Out with the old rule-out: raising the bar for acute 
chest pain evaluation with randomized trials of cardiac imaging. J Am Coll 
Cardiol Img. 2017;10:350–353.
 9. Bhatt DL. Advancing the care of cardiac patients using registry data: going 
where randomized clinical trials dare not. JAMA. 2010;303:2188–2189.
 10. Ellrodt AG, Fonarow GC, Schwamm LH, et al. Synthesizing lessons learned 
from get with the guidelines: the value of disease-based registries in im-
proving quality and outcomes. Circulation. 2013;128:2447–2460.
 11. Bhatt DL, Drozda JP Jr, Shahian DM, et al. ACC/AHA/STS statement on 
the future of registries and the performance measurement enterprise: a 
report of the American College of Cardiology/American Heart Association 
Task Force on Performance Measures and The Society of Thoracic Sur-
geons. Circulation: Cardiovascular Quality and Outcomes. 2015;8:634–648.
 12. Winchester DE, Osborne A, Peacock WF, et al. Closing gaps in essen-
tial chest pain care through accreditation. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2020;75: 
2478–2482.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on November 12, 2025

Circulation. 2021;144:e368–e454. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000001029 November 30, 2021 e445
Gulati et al 2021 Chest Pain GuidelineCLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINESAPPENDIX
Appendix 1. Author Relationships With Industry and Other Entities (Relevant)—2021 AHA/ACC/ASE/CHEST/SAEM/SCCT/
SCMR Guideline for the Evaluation and Diagnosis of Chest Pain
Committee 
Member Employment ConsultantSpeakers  
BureauOwnership/  
Partnership/  
PrincipalPersonal  
ResearchInstitutional,  
Organizational, or  
Other Financial 
BenefitExpert 
Witness
Martha  
Gulati 
(Chair)The University of Arizona 
Phoenix—Professor of Med-
icine & Chief of CardiologyNone None None None None None
Phillip D. 
Levy  
(Vice Chair)Wayne State University—
Professor and Associate 
Chair for Research, De-
partment of Emergency 
Medicine; Assistant Vice 
President for Translation-
al Science and Clinical 
Research Innovation•  Apex  
Innovation*
•  AstraZeneca
•  AstraZeneca, Hospital 
Quality Foundation
•  Beckman Coulter
•  Boehringer Ingelheim
•  Bristol-Myers Squibb
•  Cardiorentis
•  Novartis*
•  Ortho Diagnostics*
•  Pfizer
•  Roche*
•  Sciex
•  Shire*
•  Siemens*
•  The Medicines Company
•  Trevena
•  ZS PharmaNone •  Carbon  
Lifeform  
Innovations†
•  Mespere†•  Amgen*
•  Bristol-Myers 
Squibb*
•  Cardiorentis*
•  Edwards Life-
sciences*
•  Gilead Sciences*
•  Novartis*
•  Pfizer*
•  Roche*
•  Shire*
•  Trevena•  Amgen*
•  Edwards*
•  E.R. Squibb & 
Sons, L.L.C.
•  Janssen  
Pharmaceuticals
•  RocheNone
Debabrata 
Mukherjee 
(Vice Chair)Texas Tech University 
Health Sciences Center 
El Paso—Chairman, De-
partment of MedicineNone None None None None None
Ezra  
AmsterdamUC Davis Medical Cen-
ter—Professor, Depart-
ment of Internal MedicineNone None None None None None
Deepak L. 
BhattBrigham and Women’s 
Hospital Heart & Vascular 
Center—Executive Direc-
tor of Interventional Car-
diovascular Programs; 
Harvard Medical School—
Professor of Medicine•  Daiichi Sankyo
•  Pfizer*None None •  Abbott*
•  Amarin*
•  Amgen*
•  AstraZeneca*
•  Bayer*
•  Boehringer Ingel-
heim*
•  Bristol-Myers 
Squibb*
•  Cardax*
•  Chiesi*
•  Eisai*
•  Eli Lilly*
•  Ethicon*
•  FlowCo†
•  Forest Labora-
tories*
•  Idorsia*
•  Ironwood*
•  Ischemix*
•  Medtronic*
•  Merck*
•  Pfizer*
•  PhaseBio*
•  PLx Pharma*
•  Regeneron*
•  Roche*
•  Sanofi-aventis*
•  Synaptic*
•  Takeda†
•  The Medicines 
Company*•  Amarin Pharma 
Inc. *
•  AstraZeneca*
•  Biotronik‡
•  Boehringer 
Ingelheim*
•  Boston Scien-
tific‡
•  Cardax†
•  Merck†
•  Novartis
•  PhaseBio†
•  PLx Pharma†
•  Regado Biosci-
ences†
•  Sanofi-aventis*
•  St. Jude Medi-
cal‡
•  Svelte‡None
(Continued )
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on November 12, 2025

November 30, 2021 Circulation. 2021;144:e368–e454. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000001029 e446
Gulati et al 2021 Chest Pain GuidelineCLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINESKim K.  
BirtcherUniversity of Houston 
College of Pharmacy—
Clinical ProfessorNone None None None None None
Ron  
BlanksteinHarvard Medical School—
Associate Professor of 
Medicine and Radiology, 
Co-Director, Cardiovas-
cular Imaging Training 
Program; Brigham and 
Women’s Hospital—Asso-
ciate Physician, Preven-
tive Cardiology; Director, 
Cardiac Computed 
Tomography•  Amgen
•  Astellas Inc
•  EKOS Corp.None None •  Amgen†
•  Astellas Pharma†
•  Gilead Sciences†
•  Sanofi-aventis†•  Sanofi US Ser-
vices*None
Jack Boyd Stanford University—Clini-
cal Assistant Professor, 
Department of Cardiotho-
racic Surgery•  Esculon/Centese
•  SorinNone None None None None
Renee P. 
Bullock-
PalmerDeborah Heart & Lung 
Center—Director, Wom-
en’s Heart Center; Direc-
tor, Non-Invasive Cardiac 
ImagingNone None None None None None
Theresa 
ConejoNazareth Hospital—Heart 
Failure CoordinatorNone None None None None None
Deborah B. 
DiercksUT Southwestern—Pro-
fessor and Chair, De-
partment of Emergency 
Medicine•  ETHealthcare
•  Janssen Pharmaceu-
ticals
•  Novartis*None None • Abbott*
• Bristol-Myers 
Squibb†
• Ortho Clinical†
• Roche*
• Siemens• E.R. Squibb & 
Sons, L.L.C. *
• Konica Minolta 
Healthcare 
Americans, Inc.None
Federico 
GentileCentro Cardiologico Gen-
tile, Naples, Italy—DirectorNone None None None None None
John P. 
GreenwoodLeeds Institute of Cardio-
vascular and Metabolic 
Medicine—Mautner Chair 
of Cardiology, Division of 
Biomedical ImagingNone None None None None None
Erik P. Hess University of Alabama at 
Birmingham—Professor of 
Emergency Medicine and 
Vice Chair for Research, 
Department of Emer-
gency Medicine• Gilead Sciences* None None • Gilead Sciences* None None
Steven M. 
HollenbergCooper Medical School of 
Rowan University—Profes-
sor of Medicine; Cooper 
University Hospital—Direc-
tor, Coronary Care UnitNone None None None None None
Wael A. 
JaberCleveland Clinic Lerner  
College of Medicine—
Professor of Medicine, De-
partment of Cardiovascular 
Medicine and Fuad Jubran 
Endowed Chair in Cardio-
vascular Medicine, Heart 
and Vascular InstituteNone None None None None None
Hani Jneid Baylor College of Medi-
cine—Associate Professor 
of Medicine; The Michael 
DeBakey VA Medical Cen-
ter—Director of Intervention-
al Cardiology ResearchNone None None None None NoneAppendix 1. Continued
Committee 
Member Employment ConsultantSpeakers  
BureauOwnership/  
Partnership/  
PrincipalPersonal  
ResearchInstitutional,  
Organizational, or  
Other Financial 
BenefitExpert 
Witness
(Continued )
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on November 12, 2025

Circulation. 2021;144:e368–e454. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000001029 November 30, 2021 e447
Gulati et al 2021 Chest Pain GuidelineCLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINESJosé A. 
JoglarUniversity of Texas South-
western Medical Cen-
ter—Professor of Internal 
Medicine, Fellowship 
Program Director, Clinical 
Cardiac Electrophysiol-
ogy, Elizabeth Thaxton 
Page and Ellis Batten 
Page, Professorship in 
Clinical Cardiac Electro-
physiology ResearchNone None None None None None
David A. 
MorrowBrigham and Women’s 
Hospital—Director, Levine 
Cardiac Intensive Care 
Unit; Harvard Medical 
School—Professor of 
Medicine, Cardiovascular 
Division• Abbott
• Aralez Pharmaceuticals*
• AstraZeneca*
• Bayer*
• Daiichi Sankyo
• diaDexus
• Gilead Sciences
• GlaxoSmithKline*
• Merck*
• Novartis*
• Pfizer*
• Roche*
• VerseonNone None • Abbott*
• Amgen*
• AstraZeneca*
• BRAHMS*
• Daiichi-Sankyo*
• Eisai Corporation*
• GlaxoSmithKline*
• Johnson &  
Johnson*
• Medicines  
Company*
• Merck*
• Novartis*
• Pfizer*
• Regeneron*
• Roche*
• Singulex*
• Takeda Pharma-
ceuticals*• Roche* None
Robert E. 
O’ConnorUniversity of Virginia—
Professor and Chair, De-
partment of Emergency 
MedicineNone None None None •  Cardiorentis 
Ltd.†None
Michael A. 
RossEmory University School 
of Medicine—Professor, 
Department of Emer-
gency Medicine; Emory 
Healthcare—Chief of 
Service, Observation 
Medicine; Emory Univer-
sity Hospital Chest Pain 
Center—Medical DirectorNone None None None None None
Leslee J. 
ShawIcahn School of 
Medicine, Mount Sinai—
ProfessorNone None None None •  Covanos, Inc– 
Scientific Advi -
sory Board†None
This table represents the relationships of committee members with industry and other entities that were determined to be relevant to this document. These 
relationships were reviewed and updated in conjunction with all meetings and/or conference calls of the writing committee during the document development 
process. The table does not necessarily reflect relationships with industry at the time of publication. A person is deemed to have a significant interest in a busi-
ness if the interest represents ownership of ≥ 5% of the voting stock or share of the business entity, or ownership of ≥ $5 000 of the fair market value of the busi-
ness entity, or if funds received by the person from the business entity exceed 5% of the person’s gross income for the previous year. Relationships that exist 
with no financial benefit are also included for the purpose of transparency. Relationships in this table are modest unless otherwise noted.
According to the ACC/AHA, a person has a relevant relationship IF: a) the relationship or interest relates to the same or similar subject matter, intellectual property 
or asset, topic, or issue addressed in the document; or b) the company/entity (with whom the relationship exists) makes a drug, drug class, or device addressed in 
the document or makes a competing drug or device addressed in the document; or c) the person or a member of the person’s household, has a reasonable potential 
for financial, professional or other personal gain or loss as a result of the issues/content addressed in the document. Writing committee members are required 
to recuse themselves from voting on sections to which their specific relationships with industry and other entities may apply.
*Significant relationship.
†No financial benefit.
‡This disclosure was entered under the Clinical Trial Enroller category in the ACC’s disclosure system. To appear in this category, the author acknowledges that 
there is no direct or institutional relationship with the trial sponsor as defined in the ACC/AHA Disclosure Policy for Writing Committees.
ACC indicates American College of Cardiology; AHA, American Heart Association; ASE, American Society of Echocardiography; CHEST, American College of 
Chest Physicians; SAEM, Society for Academic Emergency Medicine; SCCT, Society of Cardiovascular Computed Tomography; SCMR, Society for Cardiovascular 
Magnetic Resonance; UC, University of California; UT, University of Texas; and VA, Veterans Affairs.Appendix 1. Continued
Committee 
Member Employment ConsultantSpeakers  
BureauOwnership/  
Partnership/  
PrincipalPersonal  
ResearchInstitutional,  
Organizational, or  
Other Financial 
BenefitExpert 
Witness
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on November 12, 2025

November 30, 2021 Circulation. 2021;144:e368–e454. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000001029 e448
Gulati et al 2021 Chest Pain GuidelineCLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINESAppendix 2. Reviewer Relationships With Industry and Other Entities (Comprehensive)—2021 AHA/ACC/ASE/CHEST/SAEM/
SCCT/SCMR Guideline for the Evaluation and Diagnosis of Chest Pain
Reviewer RepresentationEmploy-
ment ConsultantSpeakers  
BureauOwnership/  
Partnership/  
PrincipalPersonal  
ResearchInstitutional,  
Organizational,  
or Other Financial 
BenefitExpert  
Witness
Sana M.  
Al-KhatibContent  
Reviewer—AHADuke  
University 
Medical  
Center• Medtronic
• Milestone  
PharmaceuticalsNone None • Abbott
• Medtronic*
• NHLBI*
• PCORI*
• US Food  
and Drug  
Administration*• Abbott
• AHA*
• Bristol-Myers  
Squibb
• Medtronic
• PfizerNone
Mouaz  
Al-MallahOfficial Reviewer—
American Society 
of Nuclear 
CardiologyHouston 
Methodist• Pfizer None None • Siemens† • Amgen
• GE Healthcare‡*
• Pfizer
• SiemensNone
Jayashri 
R. AragamOfficial Reviewer—
American 
Society of 
EchocardiographyWest Roxbury 
VA Hospital, 
Harvard 
Medical SchoolNone None None None None None
Ragavendra 
BaligaContent Reviewer—
ACC/AHAOhio State 
University 
HospitalNone None None None • Baliga’s Textbook of 
Internal Medicine with 
1480 MCQs, Editor-in-
Chief†
• Elsevier, Deputy Editor†
• Lippincott Williams & 
Wilkins
• McGraw-Hill 
Cardiology Textbook, 
Editor-in-Chief
• Oxford University 
Press & Przewodnik 
praktyczny jak 
stosowac statyny, 
Termedia Wydawnictwa 
Medyczne, Editor
• Oxford University Press, 
Series Editor
• Springer, Co Editor-in-
Chief
• W.B. Saunders/
Elsevier, 250 Cases in 
Clinical Medicine, Third 
EditionNone
Joshua A. 
BeckmanContent Reviewer—
ACC/AHA Joint 
Committee on 
Clinical Practice 
GuidelinesVanderbilt 
University 
Medical  
Center• Amgen
• GlaxoSmithKline*
• JanOne
• Janssen
• Pharmaceuticals*
• Sanofi-aventis*None • EMX†
• JanaCare†• Bayer (DSMB)
• Novartis (DSMB)• Amgen
• GlaxoSmithKline
• Vascular Interventional 
Advances*None
Daniel S. 
BermanOfficial Reviewer—
AHACedars-Sinai 
Medical  
Center• Bayer*
• Cedars-Sinai  
Medical Center*
• General ElectricNone None None • Amgen*
• Bayer
• Cedars-Sinai  
Medical Center
• GE Healthcare*None
Kelley  
BranchContent 
Reviewer—Society 
of Cardiovascular 
Computed 
TomographyUniversity of 
Washington• Bayer*
• Janssen  
Pharmaceuticals*None None • Bayer*
• Locke  
Foundation 
Grant*
• Novartis‡• AstraZeneca
• Bayer*
• Janssen 
Pharmaceuticals
• Novartis
• Sanofi-aventisNone
Andrew Choi Official Reviewer—
Society of 
Cardiovascular 
Computed 
TomographyThe George 
Washington 
University 
School of 
MedicineNone None • Cleerly, Inc. * None None None
Melissa A. 
DaubertOfficial  
Reviewer—AHADuke  
University  
Medical  
CenterNone None None None • 4D Molecular  
Contrafect
• Heartflow
• NIH
• Roche
• VerliyNone
(Continued )
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on November 12, 2025

Circulation. 2021;144:e368–e454. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000001029 November 30, 2021 e449
Gulati et al 2021 Chest Pain GuidelineCLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINESLisa de las 
FuentesContent  
Reviewer—ACC/
AHA Joint 
Committee on 
Clinical Practice 
GuidelinesWashington 
University• Acceleron
• Altavant
• Arena
• Bayer
• Express Scripts
• Gilead Sciences
• Johnson & 
Johnson
• Mentor Planning 
and Consulting
• Phase Bio
• V-wave
• WebMD*• Bayer*
• Simply 
Speaking*None • Acceleron*
• Altavant*
• Bayer
• Complexa*
• Johnson & 
Johnson*
• Liquidia*
• Medtronic*
• NIH*
• Reata
• Trio Analytics*
• United 
Therapeutics*
• University 
of Kentucky 
(DSMB)
• University of 
Toronto (DSMB)†• ACC†
• AHA†
• Circulation Journals
• Pulmonary 
Hypertension 
Association*None
Anita Deswal Content  
Reviewer—ACC/
AHA Joint 
Committee on 
Clinical Practice 
GuidelinesUT MD  
Anderson  
Cancer  
CenterNone None None None • ACC
• AHA
• HFSA†None
Dave L.  
DixonContent  
Reviewer—ACC/
AHA Joint 
Committee on 
Clinical Practice 
GuidelinesVirginia  
Commonwealth 
University 
School of  
Pharmacy• American 
Pharmacists 
AssociationNone None • Centers for 
Disease Control 
and Prevention*
• Community 
Pharmacy  
Foundation*• Accreditation 
Council for Clinical 
Lipidology†
• American College of 
Pharmacy Cardiology 
Practice Research  
Network†
• American Pharmacists 
Association
• National Lipid  
Association†None
John U. 
DohertyOfficial  
Reviewer—ACCJefferson  
University  
HospitalsNone None None None None None
Maros 
FerencikContent  
Reviewer—Society 
of Cardiovascular 
Computed  
TomographyOregon Health 
& Science  
University• Biograph* None • AHA,  
Fellow to 
Faculty Award*• NIH* • HeartFlow‡ None
Lee A. 
FleisherContent Reviewer—
ACC/AHA Joint 
Committee on 
Clinical Practice 
GuidelinesCenters for 
Medicare & 
Medicaid  
Services 
(CMS)None None None • NIH None None
Mario Garcia Content Reviewer—
AHA/ACCMontefiore 
Medical  
CenterNone None None None • Abiomed
• Medtronic Vascular, Inc.
• Novartis
• PhilipsNone
Seth  
GemmeOfficial Reviewer—
American College 
of Emergency 
PhysiciansBaystate 
Medical Center• Roche 
DiagnosticsNone None None None None
Zachary D. 
GoldbergerContent Reviewer—
ACC/AHA Joint 
Committee on 
Clinical Practice 
GuidelinesUniversity of 
Wisconsin 
School of 
Medicine and 
Public HealthNone None None None None None
Bulent 
GorenekContent Reviewer—
ACC/AHA Joint 
Committee on 
Clinical Practice 
GuidelinesEskisehir 
Osmangazi 
University• AstraZeneca
• SandozNone None None None NoneAppendix 2. Continued
Reviewer RepresentationEmploy-
ment ConsultantSpeakers  
BureauOwnership/  
Partnership/  
PrincipalPersonal  
ResearchInstitutional,  
Organizational,  
or Other Financial 
BenefitExpert  
Witness
(Continued )
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on November 12, 2025

November 30, 2021 Circulation. 2021;144:e368–e454. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000001029 e450
Gulati et al 2021 Chest Pain GuidelineCLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINESNorrisa 
HaynesContent Reviewer—
ACC/AHA Joint 
Committee on 
Clinical Practice 
GuidelinesUniversity of 
PennsylvaniaNone None None None None None
Adrian F. 
HernandezContent Reviewer—
ACC/AHA Joint 
Committee on 
Clinical Practice 
GuidelinesDuke University • Amgen
• AstraZeneca*
• Bayer
• Biofourmis
• Boehringer 
Ingelheim
• Boston Scientific*
• Cytokinetics
• Daiichi Sankyo
• Eli Lilly
• Merck*
• Myokardia
• Novartis*
• Pfizer
• Relypsa
• Sanofi-aventis*
• XogenexNone None • American Regent
• AstraZeneca*
• Eidos (DSMB)
• Genentech
• GlaxoSmithKline*
• Janssen  
Pharmaceuticals
• Merck
• NIH†
• Novartis*
• PCORI†
• Verily*• AHA†
• AstraZeneca
• Boston Scientific
• CSL Behring
• Janssen 
Pharmaceuticals*
• Merck
• Novartis
• Genentech*
• Relypsa
• Sanofi-aventis• Defendant, 
Patent 
Dispute, 
2019
Mark A.  
HlatkyContent  
Reviewer—ACC/
AHA Joint 
Committee on 
Clinical Practice 
GuidelinesStanford 
University 
School of 
Medicine• ACC, Global 
Advisory 
Committee
• Blue Cross Blue 
Shield Center 
for Effectiveness 
Evaluation*
• The Medicines 
CompanyNone None • HeartFlow*
• NHLBI (DSMB)
• St. Jude• George Institute† None
Stephen 
HooleContent  
Reviewer—ACCRoyal  
Papworth 
Hospital, UK• Abbott*
• Bayer
• Boston Scientific• AstraZeneca
• Bayer
• Novo NordiskNone • Abbott*
• AstraZeneca*None None
W. Schuyler 
JonesContent  
Reviewer—ACC/
AHA Joint 
Committee on 
Clinical Practice 
GuidelinesDuke  
University• Amgen
• Bayer*
• Janssen  
Pharmaceuticals*
• PfizerNone None • Bristol-Myers 
Squibb
• Janssen  
Pharmaceuticals
• Patient- 
Centered  
Outcomes 
Research  
Institute• Abbott*
• Amgen
• AstraZeneca
• Boehringer Ingelheim
• Cardiovascular  
Systems Inc. *
• Janssen 
Pharmaceuticals
• ZOLL MedicalNone
Michael 
KontosContent  
Reviewer—ACCVirginia  
Commonwealth 
University 
HealthNone None None None • ACC*
• NIH‡
• Society for Academic 
Emergency Medicine†
• VCSQUI†
• VHAC†None
Raymond 
KwongOfficial  
Reviewer—Society 
for Cardiovascular 
Magnetic  
ResonanceBrigham and 
Women’s  
HospitalNone None None • Alnylam, Inc*
• MyoKardia*
• NIH• Bayer
• Siemens
• Society for  
Cardiovascular  
Magnetic Resonance†None
Glenn N. 
LevineContent Reviewer—
Former Chair of 
the ACC/AHA 
Task Force on 
Clinical Practice 
GuidelinesBaylor College 
of MedicineNone None None None None • Defendant, 
In-hospital 
death, 2020
• Defendant, 
In-hospital 
death, 2019*
Jonathan 
LindnerOfficial Reviewer—
American 
Society of 
EchocardiographyOregon Health 
& Science 
UniversityNone None None • Bracco†
• GE Healthcare
• GE Lifesciences†
• Pfizer†• Lantheus Medical 
Imaging, Inc.NoneAppendix 2. Continued
Reviewer RepresentationEmploy-
ment ConsultantSpeakers  
BureauOwnership/  
Partnership/  
PrincipalPersonal  
ResearchInstitutional,  
Organizational,  
or Other Financial 
BenefitExpert  
Witness
(Continued )
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on November 12, 2025

Circulation. 2021;144:e368–e454. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000001029 November 30, 2021 e451
Gulati et al 2021 Chest Pain GuidelineCLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINESG.B. John 
ManciniContent Reviewer—
ACCVancouver 
Hospital 
Research 
Pavillion, 
Professor of 
Medicine• Amgen
• AstraZeneca
• Bayer
• Boehringer 
Ingelheim
• Eli Lilly
• Esperion
• HLS 
Therapeutics
• Merck
• Pfizer
• Regeneron
• Sanofi-aventis• Amgen
• HLS 
Therapeutics
• Sanofi-
aventisNone • Novo Nordisk
• NovartisPleNone None
Daniel B. 
MarkContent Reviewer—
ACC/AHA Joint 
Committee on 
Clinical Practice 
GuidelinesDuke University None None None None • HeartFlow*
• Merck*None
Jim McCord Content Reviewer—
ACC/AHAHenry Ford 
Health System• Beckman
• Roche*
• Siemens*None None • Abbott*
• Beckman 
Diagnostics*
• Roche*
• Siemens• ACC Accreditation 
Services, Board 
Member†None
C. Noel 
Bairey MerzContent  
Reviewer—ACC/
AHACedars-Sinai 
Heart Institute• Med Intelligence None None • California Institute 
for Precision 
Medicine*
• DOD Warrior*
• NIH-NIA*
• Sanofi-aventis*
• WISE pre-
HFpEF*• Bayer, Advisory Board
• iRhythm*None
Nicholas L. 
MillsContent  
Reviewer—ACCBHF Centre for 
Cardiovascular 
Science, 
University of 
Edinburgh, 
Edinburgh, 
Scotland• Abbott
• Laboratories
• LumiraDx
• Roche Diagnostics
• Siemens 
HealthineersNone None None None None
James Min Content Reviewer—
ACC/AHA• Cleerly, Inc. None None • Cleerly, Inc. • NIH • Ablative Solutions
• Arineta
• Memphis MeatsNone
L. Kristin 
NewbyContent Reviewer—
ACCDuke University • Beckman-Coulter
• BioKier
• Bristol-Myers 
Squibb
• CSL
• Medtronic
• NHLBI
• Quidel
• Roche 
DiagnosticsNone None • Boehringer 
Ingelheim
• David H. Murdock 
Institute for 
Business and 
Culture
• NIH
• North Carolina 
DHHS• AHA†
• ACC, Oregon Chapter
• AstraZeneca†
• Boehringer Ingelheim
• David H. Murdock 
Research Institute†
• JACC, Deputy Editor*
• Roche DiagnosticsNone
Patrick T. 
O’GaraContent Reviewer—
ACC/AHA Joint 
Committee on 
Clinical Practice 
GuidelinesBrigham and 
Women’s 
HospitalNone None None None • Edwards Lifesciences†
• JAMA Cardiology*
• NIH*
• Medtrace†
• Medtronic†
• Medtronic Vascular, 
Inc.None
(Continued )Appendix 2. Continued
Reviewer RepresentationEmploy-
ment ConsultantSpeakers  
BureauOwnership/  
Partnership/  
PrincipalPersonal  
ResearchInstitutional,  
Organizational,  
or Other Financial 
BenefitExpert  
Witness
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on November 12, 2025

November 30, 2021 Circulation. 2021;144:e368–e454. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000001029 e452
Gulati et al 2021 Chest Pain GuidelineCLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINESKevin O’Neil Content  
Reviewer—
American 
College of Chest 
PhysiciansWilmington 
Health, PLLCNone None None None • American Board of 
Internal Medicine
• Astellas Pharma
• Commission on 
Accreditation for 
Respiratory Care†
• Genentech
• Genzyme
• GlaxoSmith Kline
• Insmed
• Otsuka
• America 
Pharmaceuticals
• Philips
• Resmed Corp
• Sunovion 
PharmaceuticalsNone
W. Frank 
PeacockContent  
Reviewer—AHABaylor College 
of Medicine• Abbott
• AstraZeneca
• Instrumentation 
Laboratories
• Janssen  
Pharmaceuticals*
• Medicure
• Pharma Inc.
• Quidel
• Relypsa
• SiemensNone • Comprehensive 
Research  
Associates*
• Emergencies in 
Medicine†• Roche* • Abbott
• Aseptiscope*
• Astellas Pharma
• AstraZeneca
• Beckman Coulter, Inc. *
• Boehringer Ingelheim*
• DiaSorin S.P.A. *
• E.R. Squibb & Sons, 
L.L.C. *
• Instrumentation 
Laboratory Company*
• Janssen 
Pharmaceuticals*
• Medicure Pharma Inc.
• Quidel
• Relypsa
• Roche*
• Salix Pharmaceutical 
Division of Bausch 
Health US, LLC
• Siemens*None
Carl Pepine Content  
Reviewer—ACC/
AHAUniversity of 
Florida• Caladrius
• Biosciences
• Elsevier
• Slack Inc. *
• Verily
• XyloCorNone None • Biocardia*
• Brigham and 
Women’s 
Hospital*
• CSL Behring*
• Cytori 
Therapeutics*‡
• DCRI*
• GE Healthcare
• InVentive Health 
Clinical, LLC‡
• Mesoblast*
• NIH‡
• NIH/NHLBI*
• Pfizer
• Sanofi-aventis‡
• US Department 
of Defense*None None
Andrea L. 
PriceContent  
Reviewer—ACCIndiana 
University 
HealthNone None • Quality 
Informatics 
Synergies, LLC• ACC, 
Accreditation 
Foundation 
Board*None None
Susan B. 
PromesOfficial Reviewer—
American College 
of Emergency 
PhysiciansPenn State 
Health Milton 
S. Hershey 
Medical CenterNone None None None None None
Tanveer Rab Content  
Reviewer—ACCEmory 
UniversityNone None None None None None
Harish 
RamakrishnaContent  
Reviewer—ACCMayo Clinic None None None None None NoneAppendix 2. Continued
Reviewer RepresentationEmploy-
ment ConsultantSpeakers  
BureauOwnership/  
Partnership/  
PrincipalPersonal  
ResearchInstitutional,  
Organizational,  
or Other Financial 
BenefitExpert  
Witness
(Continued )
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on November 12, 2025

Circulation. 2021;144:e368–e454. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000001029 November 30, 2021 e453
Gulati et al 2021 Chest Pain GuidelineCLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINESBasmah 
SafdarOfficial Reviewer—
Society for 
Academic 
Emergency 
MedicineYale School of 
MedicineNone None None None • OrthoClinical*
• Roche*None
Michael 
SalernoContent Reviewer—
Society for 
Cardiovascular 
Magnetic 
ResonanceUniversity of 
VirginiaNone None None • NIH* • Heartflow
• Siemens• Defendant, 
SPECT 
Camera 
Malfunction, 
2020
Ada 
Stefanescu 
SchmidtContent Reviewer—
ACCUniversity 
of Toronto; 
Harvard 
UniversityNone None None None None None
Prem Soman Official Reviewer—
American Society 
of Nuclear 
CardiologyUniversity of 
Pittsburgh 
Medical Center• Alnylam Pharma
• Eidos
• PfizerNone None None • Astellas
• Pharma*
• PfizerNone
Jacqueline 
Tamis- 
HollandContent Reviewer—
ACC/AHA Joint 
Committee on 
Clinical Practice 
GuidelinesMount Sinai 
Morningside 
HospitalNone None None • Internal-
Minneapolis 
Heart Institute†
• The NGS Predict 
Study‡• Abbott†
• AHA†
• Bronx Lebanon 
Hospital, Cardiology 
Fellowship Program 
Director†
• Medscape/Heart.org
• NIH†‡
• NYS†None
James 
ThomasContent  
Reviewer—ACC/
AHANorthwestern 
Medicine• Abbott
• Caption Health*
• Edwards 
Lifesciences*
• General Electric
• Shire North 
American Group 
Inc. *None None • Abbott
• Caption Health
• General Electric• Abbott
• Caption Health*
• Edwards Lifesciences*
• Medtronic Vascular, Inc.
• Shire North American 
Group Inc.None
Todd Villines Official Reviewer—
Society of 
Cardiovascular 
Computed 
Tomography and 
ACCUniversity of 
Virginia Health 
SystemNone None None None None None
Andrew R. 
WaxlerOfficial Reviewer—
ACCPenn State 
HealthNone • Amarin*
• Regeneron*
• Sanofi-
aventis*None None • Abbott
• Amarin*
• Amgen
• Boehringer Ingelheim
• DalCor Pharmaceuticals
• Janssen 
Pharmaceuticals
• Novartis
• Penn State-St. Joseph 
Medical Center 
Foundation, Board 
Member†
• Penn State—St. 
Joseph Medical 
Center Pharmacy 
and Therapeutics, 
Committee Member†
• Portola
• Regeneron
• Sanofi-aventis
• The Medicines 
Company
• ZOLL MedicalNoneAppendix 2. Continued
Reviewer RepresentationEmploy-
ment ConsultantSpeakers  
BureauOwnership/  
Partnership/  
PrincipalPersonal  
ResearchInstitutional,  
Organizational,  
or Other Financial 
BenefitExpert  
Witness
(Continued )
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on November 12, 2025

November 30, 2021 Circulation. 2021;144:e368–e454. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000001029 e454
Gulati et al 2021 Chest Pain GuidelineCLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINESNanette K. 
WengerContent Reviewer—
AHAEmory 
University• Amarin Pharma, 
Inc.
• AstraZeneca
• Janssen 
PharmaceuticalsNone None • AstraZeneca†
• Boehringer 
Ingelheim
• US Department 
of Defense
• Duke Clinical 
Research 
Institute†
• NHLBI†
• ZOLL Medical†None None
Joseph Woo Content Reviewer—
ACC/AHA Joint 
Committee on 
Clinical Practice 
GuidelinesStanford 
University 
School of 
MedicineNone None None None • NIH* None
Sammy 
ZakariaOfficial Reviewer—
American 
College of Chest 
PhysiciansJohns Hopkins 
University 
School of 
MedicineNone None None None None None
Mark J.  
ZuckerOfficial Reviewer—
American 
College of Chest 
PhysiciansNewark Beth 
Israel Medical 
CenterNone None None None None None
This table represents all relationships of reviewers with industry and other entities that were reported at the time of peer review, including those not deemed to be relevant to this document, 
at the time this document was under review. The table does not necessarily reflect relationships with industry at the time of publication. A person is deemed to have a significant interest in 
a business if the interest represents ownership of ≥5% of the voting stock or share of the business entity, or ownership of ≥$5000 of the fair market value of the business entity, or if funds 
received by the person from the business entity exceed 5% of the person’s gross income for the previous year. Relationships that exist with no financial benefit are also included for the purpose 
of transparency. Relationships in this table are modest unless otherwise noted. Names are listed in alphabetical order within each category of review. Please refer to https://www.acc.org/
guidelines/about-guidelines-and-clinical-documents/relationships-with-industry-policy  for definitions of disclosure categories or additional information about the ACC/AHA Disclosure Policy for 
Writing Committees.
*Significant relationship.
†No financial benefit.
‡This disclosure was entered under the Clinical Trial Enroller category in the ACC’s disclosure system. To appear in this category, the author acknowledges that there is no direct or institutional 
relationship with the trial sponsor as defined in the (ACCF or AHA/ACC) Disclosure Policy for Writing Committees.
ACC indicates American College of Cardiology; ACCF, American College of Cardiology Foundation; AHA, American Heart Association; ASE, American Society of Echocardiography; ASNC, 
American Society of Nuclear Cardiology; CHEST, American College of Chest Physicians; DCRI, Duke Clinical Research Institute; DHHS, Department of Health and Human Services; DOD, 
Department of Defense; DSMB, data and safety monitoring board; HFSA, Heart Failure Society of America; JACC, Journal of the American College of Cardiology; NHLBI, National Heart, Lung, and 
Blood Institute; NIA, National Institute on Aging; NIH, National Institutes of Health; NYS, New York state; PCORI, Patient-Centered Outcomes Research Institute; SAEM, Society for Academic 
Emergency Medicine; SCCT, Society of Cardiovascular Computed Tomography; SCMR, Society for Cardiovascular Magnetic Resonance; UT, University of Texas; VCSQI, Virginia Cardiac 
Services Quality Initiative; VA, Veterans Affairs; and VHAC, Virginia Heart Attack Coalition.Appendix 2. Continued
Reviewer RepresentationEmploy-
ment ConsultantSpeakers  
BureauOwnership/  
Partnership/  
PrincipalPersonal  
ResearchInstitutional,  
Organizational,  
or Other Financial 
BenefitExpert  
Witness
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on November 12, 2025

