Report from the NIH Ofﬁce
of Research on Women’s Health
Addressing Health Challenges of Women
Across the Life Course:
Summary of the Women’s Health 2018
Preconference Symposium
April Schweinhart, PhD,1Victoria Cargill, MD,2Kathleen Brady, MD, PhD,3Kara Hall, PhD,4
Elizabeth Spencer, BSN,2and Janine Clayton, MD2
Abstract
Although the United States is often ahead in both research and health care ﬁelds, it lags behind peer countries in
many population health indicators. To address these complex health problems that often reﬂect the intersection
of many socioeconomic and health issues, it is essential that scientists work collaboratively across distinctdisciplines. Women’s health is but one area which can beneﬁt from such an approach given the multifaceted andcomplex issues underlying the different aspects of women’s health research. The National Institutes of Health(NIH) Ofﬁce of Research on Women’s Health (ORWH) and the Ofﬁce of Women’s Health of the U.S. Food andDrug Administration (FDA) cosponsored a preconference symposium at the Women’s Health 2018 Conference,held in May in Arlington, VA, to highlight interdisciplinary approaches to research, how researchers can workcollaboratively, and how to apply multifaceted approaches to complex real-world problems. Three speakers
presented information on a range of subjects related to the health of women across the life course, including the
distinction between multidisciplinary, interdisciplinary, and transdisciplinary approaches; the science behindTeam Science and how its ﬁndings apply to working collaboratively; and gender inequalities in the opioidepidemic. This article summarizes the major points of the presentations and the subsequent discussions.
Keywords: multidisciplinary; interdisciplinary; transdisciplinary; team science; opioid use disorder;
intersectionality
Introduction
Despite being a leader in biomedical research, impor-
tant population health indicators for the United States
are often falling behind peer nations. As an example, since1980, life expectancy for men and women in the United
States has fallen well below average in comparison to other
industrialized nations. Moreover, while White men’s lifeexpectancy follows the trend of other industrialized nations
and has continued to increase over time, White women’s life
expectancy in the United States has begun to decrease since1986.
1,2Within the United States, geography plays an im-
portant role in life expectancy; however, the picture is com-
plex, as other factors, such as education, socioeconomic
conditions, and built environment, all affect life expectancy.3,4Jennifer Montez et al. have found that state-level factors,such as economic conditions, physical infrastructure poli-cies, and tobacco environment, can only account for about a
third of this variation in mortality rates.
5Another third was
accounted for by individual-lev el factors, such as age, race,
ethnicity, income, and marital s tatus; the social context and
environment of women are signiﬁcant contributors to her
personal health factors. Thus , adoption of a multifaceted
research approach to address the health of women across the
life course can identify key intersecting factors affecting
health outcomes.
Multidimensional considerations and interdisciplinary
approaches are central to the Ofﬁce of Research on Women’s
Health (ORWH) vision for the health of women. Women
comprise more than 50% of the U.S. population and tend to
1PIRE Louisville Center, Paciﬁc Institute for Research and Evaluation, Louisville, Kentucky.
2Ofﬁce of Research on Women’s Health, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland.
3Ofﬁce of Research, Medical University of South Carolina, Charleston, South Carolina.
4National Cancer Institute, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland.JOURNAL OF WOMEN’S HEALTH
Volume 28, Number 6, 2019ªMary Ann Liebert, Inc.
DOI: 10.1089/jwh.2019.29027.pcss
741
outlive men. Yet, biomedical research has often excluded
women from clinical trials over the years, leading to not only
gaps in knowledge but also in understanding of sex differ-ences and in disease treatment and response, especially forconditions such as cardiovascular disease, certain cancers,
and rheumatoid arthritis.
6On December 13, 2016, the 21st
Century Cures Act was signed into law mandating that anystrategic plan issued by the National Institutes of Health (NIH)
institutes or centers (ICs) shal l account for women and strive to
reduce health disparities among women. The act underscoresthat researchers must methodically examine and report health
data by sex, acknowledge and understand differences in wom-
en’s health based on race and et hnicity, and provide analysis
of longitudinal trends in health data to better understand thechanges in a woman’s health across the life course. While the
historical research model involves an investigator working in-
dependently and being rewarded by publication, tenure, andfunding for self-contained work, more recently, NIH has rec-
ognized the value of an interdisciplinary methodology, exam-
ining the intersections of many factors upon health throughbiomedical, epidemiological, and life course approaches to ﬁll
existing knowledge gaps in women’s health.
The NIH ORWH and the Ofﬁce of Women’s Health of the
U . S .F o o da n dD r u gA d m i n i s t r a t i o n( F D A )c o s p o n s o r e da
preconference symposium at the Women’s Health 2018 Con-
ference, held in May in Arlington, VA. Presentations from thesymposium, ‘‘Addressing Health Challenges of Women Acrossthe Life Course,’’ highlighted the key role interdisciplinary
approaches can play to women’s health research, how re-
searchers can work collaboratively through team science, andhow to apply multifaceted approaches to a complex real-world
problem such as opioid abuse. The workshop began with a
welcome from Dr. Susan Kornstein, Executive Director of theVirginia Commonwealth University Institute for Women’s
Health, Editor-in-Chief of the Journal of Women’s Health ,a n d
President of the Academy of Women’s Health.
Opening Remarks
Dr. Janine Clayton, Director, ORWH, NIH, opened the
meeting, introducing the ORWH mission to address the health
of women from head to toe, as well as to honor the legacy ofDr. Vivian Pinn, the ﬁrst ORWH Director. An important
part of Dr. Pinn’s legacy is the inclusion of interdisciplinary
research to address the entire health of a woman (fromphysical health to mental and emotional health) and her life
course. The health of women in the United States today is
declining: maternal mortality in the United States is increasingwhile it is decreasing in other high-income countries
7;w o m e n
are less likely to be administered naloxone; and women are
less likely to be given evidence-based treatments than men.These gender inequalities are a complex problem with no easysolution. NIH is trying to bring multiple disciplines together to
strengthen the health of women.
Ms. Elizabeth Spencer, Deputy Director, ORWH, NIH,
went on to introduce the speakers and provide a brief over-
view of each presentation. At ORWH, the health of women is
considered at every level, from cellular to biomedical, toclinical, to legislative. NIH, made up of 27 ICs, is also ad-
justing its trajectory to draft a trans-NIH plan to integrate the
health of women across the ICs. The trans-NIH plan will beimportant to ensure that Sex as a Biological Variable is in-tegrated NIH-wide. The 2018 Vivian Pinn Symposium, which
took place on May 16, 2018, is available on the NIH Video-
Casting and Podcasting website (https://videocast.nih.gov/Summary.asp?File=23915&bhcp=1) and another ORWH re-source; the ORWH newsletter, ‘‘Women’s Health and Focus
at NIH,’’ can be found on the ORWH website (newsletter
subscription page).
Presentation Summaries
Introduction to interdisciplinary research:
‘‘multidisciplinary, interdisciplinary, transdisciplinary
research oh my!’’
Dr. Victoria A. Cargill, Associate Director, Interdisciplinary
Research, ORWH, NIH, explained the difference betweenmultidisciplinary, interdisciplinary, and transdisciplinary ap-proaches to research. As an example, Dr. Cargill presented a
‘‘painful lesson’’ from her own practice, the case of a young
woman who presented pregnant and HIV positive. At the time,the research recommendation to prevent mother to child trans-
mission of HIV was to terminat e the pregnancy. The same
patient returned a year later at the age of 24, again pregnant, butthis time well past the point of termination. While the woman
delivered a healthy HIV negative son, she had extensive
multidrug resistant HIV, with few options for drug treat-ment remaining to which her virus was sensitive. Although
she was treated with the drug that had the lowest threshold
for resistance, the patient developed a severe, near fatal drugreaction. It was not until two years later that examining thedata on the drug by sex demonstrated that this drug had a
very different and severe side effect proﬁle in women. This
key difference was missed because the drug had beentested primarily in men during clinical trials, and the data
from women were not analyzed. This example makes the
point; women’s lives are complex and at the center of theintersection of multiple factors—what research ﬁeld is best
positioned to include these competing demands?
When considering the answer to this question, it is im-
portant to keep in mind that women’s health requires multiplelenses—social, economic, medical (obstetrics and gynecology,
dental, primary care, etc.), interpersonal, familial, organi-
zational, community, public policy, and treatment. Multi-disciplinary research approaches these challenges by bringing
together different disciplines to address the issue(s) under
study, while continuing to maintain the separation of the dis-ciplines such that when the study is completed, those disci-
plines address ﬁndings from their unique perspectives. The
advantage of a multidisciplinary approach is the value addedof having multiple experts fro m different ﬁelds collaborat-
ing. The limitation, however, is that the ﬁelds remain sep-
arated, which can make communication across ﬁelds andscientists more difﬁcult, and a solution which synthesizesthe various disciplines harder to identify. Using a multi-
disciplinary approach to provide care for the patient pre-
sented earlier, researchers might suggest a peer-ledadherence intervention.
In contrast to multidisciplinary research, interdisciplinary
research integrates information, data, techniques, and tools oftwo or more disciplines to advance understanding beyond the
scope of any single discipline or practice.
8While multi-
disciplinary approaches remain separate, interdisciplinary
approaches move beyond single disciplines to approach742 SCHWEINHART ET AL.
problems in new and different ways, which engage a wider
audience, explain more phenomena, and may have predictive
value beyond the existing circumstances. Circling back to thepatient presented earlier, interdisciplinary approaches wouldattempt to develop interventions and predict how the patient
might react to these, given her background and history. The
limitations of interdisciplinary research include the difﬁcultyof learning a new discipline and the required collaboration and
coordination of working in teams. Moreover, academic insti-
tutions, including promotion and tenure tracks, often favor theindependent investigator.
To counteract some of these limitations, funding mecha-
nisms and opportunities, including many from ORWH, en-courage interdisciplinary research. ORWH recently issued afunding opportunity announcement (FOA) for understudied,
underreported, and underrepresented women (U3 women),
which focuses on women who are also marginalized andvulnerable. The FOA stressed on using interdisciplinary ap-
proaches and explicitly states ‘‘interdisciplinary, transdisci-
plinary, and multidisciplinary research focused on the effectof sex/gender inﬂuences at the intersection of a number of
social determinants, including but not limited to race/
ethnicity, socioeconomic status, education, health literacy,and other social determinants in human health and illness’’
9
are responsive. Bringing these approaches together, women’shealth can be viewed as a tree—with many root determinantssuch as genetic predisposition; interdisciplinary approaches,like vision science, can reach across the branches of the tree
that grow up from these different roots to span the multiple
factors that affect women’s health.
Transdisciplinary research is deﬁned as creating a new
discipline from two or more existing disciplines. A good
example of a transdisciplinary ﬁeld is bioinformatics, whichwas created by the blending of computer science and biology.
Transdisciplinary approaches move beyond their compo-
nent disciplines to create something entirely new, which setsthem apart from either multidisciplinary or interdisciplinaryapproaches.
10Transdisciplinary research allows investigators to
capitalize on innovations across various disciplines and increase
understanding of a health issue or disease state, while potentiallyaffecting policy change and including important stakeholders.
There can be a number of challenges to implementing a trans-
disciplinary approach as it requires collaboration and steppingout of comfort zones into an entirely new methodology that
requires tolerance and respect of new disciplines.
11
In conclusion, there are advantages and limitations for
each approach. While all approaches bring more to the table
than siloed independent research, they also all involve
working in teams and can become hampered by the difﬁ-culties encountered in research collaborations.
State of the science lecture: the science of team
science; building effective collaborations thatproduce results
Dr. Kara Hall, Program Director, National Cancer In-
stitute, NIH, and her colleagues began the science of Team
Science over a decade ago to help build solid collaborations.The multilayered aspects of women’s health can be linked to
the structure of Team Science, which is also multilayered;
dependent on individual-level factors, such as willingness toengage in teams; interpersonal-level factors, such as com-munication effectiveness; and organizational/societal struc-
tures.
12In addition, team problems vary by size—teams of
two have different problems than teams of 200.
Research conducted on the productivity of Team Science
research has demonstrated that cross-disciplinary teams are
more productive than single-disciplinary comparison teams,
generating more publications over time with greater scien-tiﬁc impact.13–17Moreover, gender heterogenous teams have
34% more citations, and if teams have at least one female
principal investigator, on average, they are more likely to wina grant or produce innovative ideas.15,18–21Although women
tend to do more work in collaborative frameworks and par-
ticipate in interdisciplinary teams more frequently, there arefewer women in science, and women have less seniority thanmen. In addition, including someone with higher academic
rank in a collaboration leads to greater productivity.
4,7–10The
ways in which teams are constructed, team size, the historyof collaboration, the roles different team members play,
and the amount of time and focus team members can de-
vote to a project all inﬂuence the outcomes that the teamcan expect.
15,22–26
While there is some reason to believe that multi-institutional
collaborations lead to higher impact work than co-located
teams or individual researchers, this ﬁnding is dependent
on heterogeneity of the group, as measured by the number
of disciplines and institutions.27,28As the number of in-
vestigators increases, productivity can decrease if ade-quate coordination and collaboration mechanisms are not
put in place.28,29More coordination mechanisms, includ-
ing ‘‘face to face meetings, division of responsibility,[and] clear roles and expectations,’’ led to more successful
outcomes; however, when researchers examined univer-
sities involved in collaborative cross-location teams, theydiscovered that the greater the number of universities in-
volved in projects, the fewer the number of coordination
mechanisms being utilized.
30,31
Transdisciplinary researchers working collaboratively often
ﬁnd that their Team Science work challenges them intellectu-
ally and as investigative researchers, but also ﬁnd the work to
be difﬁcult in terms of overcoming different values, language,cultures, and operating out of their comfort zone.29Traditional
academic incentive systems do not ﬁt with the collaborative
network within which many investigators are now working.The tenure system, authorship contributions, and funding op-
portunities, to mention a few, may not have caught up with
the changes in how transdisciplinary researchers are work-ing collaboratively. To overcome some of these challenges,
researchers can develop certain competencies as team sci-
e n t i s t s ,i n c l u d i n gc u r i o s i t y ,h a v i n ga no p e nm i n d ,d e m o n -strating critical awareness, evaluating limitations of all
disciplines (including one’s own), and ﬂexibility.
32,33
Hall et al. developed a four-phase model for transdis-
ciplinary research, as well as a tool kit, to help implementTeam Science. The model consists of the developmental,
conceptualization, implementation, and translational pha-
ses.34During the often-overlooked developmental phase, it is
important to consider who to bring to the table the key con-
cepts that are to be addressed and what the mission and goals
of the project will be. The next phase, conceptualization, isthe time during which team scientists develop the research
questions and hypotheses, create shared mental models and
languages, and develop a team ethic.34An important andADDRESSING HEALTH CHALLENGES OF WOMEN ACROSS THE LIFE COURSE 743
distinct aspect of the implementation phase of Team Science
is to manage conﬂict among researchers from disparate
backgrounds and consider team learning. During the trans-lational phase, researchers apply their ﬁndings to advance theproject and continue development. To help overcome the
challenges of working in teams throughout all four phases,
Hall et al. identiﬁed several options, such as a shared col-laboration plan and operating manual and other resources,
all of which are included in the Team Science Toolkit
available online at teamsciencetoolkit.cancer.gov.
35In sum-
mary, Team Science requires more care and consideration
than individual work, but can be more rewarding in terms
of productivity and innovation. Moreover, by taking ad-vantage of the ﬁndings of Team Science research, teamscientists can increase competencies through collaboration
and coordination.
Substance use disorder and opioids in women:
the intersection of biology, culture, gender, and sex
Dr. Kathleen Brady, Distinguished University Professor,
Vice President for Research, Medical University of SouthCarolina; Director, South Carolina Clinical and Translational
Research Institute, linked th e importance of integrating
disciplines and teams into tackling the major problem ofsubstance use disorder (SUD) and the opioid epidemic.
Dr. Brady reviewed the history of opioid use, beginning with
the Sumerians in 3400 BC, including the Opium Wars in theearly 1800s, the introduction of their medicinal use, includingmorphine, and ending with the outlawing of heroin in 1924.
More recently, opioid-related deaths have increased dra-
matically from 1999 to 2014.
36Part of the contribution to the
increase in death rates is the faster development of tolerance
to opioids than other drugs. There are also substantial gender
inequalities related to opioid use. For example, women have ahigher incidence of pain disorders and, thus, are more likely
to be prescribed opioids, to use them longer, and to develop a
tolerance to opioids.37
In the early 2000s, pain became the ﬁfth vital sign, and
prescribers increased their assessment of pain due to external
monitoring of patient outcomes. Patients who were in pain or
experienced pain that was poorly controlled could and wouldreport poor outcomes. At the same time, OxyContin was re-
leased, marketed, and targeted to providers as an opioid with
less abuse potential. These converging events led to a rise in theprescription rates of opiates. Now, however, in the face of
mounting public pressure, rising opioid deaths, and additional
prescribing guidelines, doctors are trying to lower prescriptionrates, with the intention of lowering opioid overdose rates.
However, while opioid prescription rates have fallen in the last
10 years, opioid-related deaths are still on the rise.
38Decreasing
opioid prescription rates correlate with the dramatic rise in theillicit opioid market to meet demand. In addition, drugs like
fentanyl and carfentanil, which are far more potent than heroin
or morphine, are causing more overdose deaths.39
Although, in general, it is true that prescription opioid use
has decreased in the overall population, prescription opioid
use among women has increased over 400% since 1999, andwomen are also more likely to die of prescription opioid
use.39Heroin use among women has also increased over the
last four decades, 100% since 2002, now reaching a similarrate to that of men.40Between 1999 and 2015, there was alsoan 850% increase in synthetic opioid-related deaths for
women.39Trends in pregnancy and opioid use are striking:
‘‘About 2.3% of women of reproductive age report non-
medical opioid use in the last 30 days. About .8% of pregnantwomen report non-medical opioid use, and about .4% at thetime of delivery had opioid misuse or dependence. This is the
24 to 34 age group, .that’s really been a pretty dramatic
increase in the last ﬁve years.’’
41,42
When considered in the wider context of multidimensional
health indicators, it is little wonder that the opioid epidemicdifferentially affects women; women have higher rates of co-occurring psychiatric disorders, they are less likely to receive
treatment, and there are gender-speciﬁc barriers to entering
treatment, such as having less social support, issues sur-rounding pregnancy, and trauma. Compared to men with
lifetime drug dependence, women are more likely to have a
co-occurring anxiety disorder, an affective disorder, and drugdependence.
43Opioid use disorder (OUD), especially, is a risk
factor for co-occurring mood and anxiety disorders across the
life course, with women being 7.5 times more likely to haveany mood disorder and 4.2 times as likely to have an anxiety
disorder.44,45
‘‘The relationship between childhood adversity and ad-
diction is stronger in women than it is in men.’’ This ﬁnding istrue in both relapse outcomes, drug initiation, and addiction
over the life course.46,47The inﬂuences of Adverse Child-
hood Experiences (ACES) may very well be related to epi-genetic vulnerability; ACES can lead to changes in DNA
expression which contribute to individual susceptibility to
addiction later in life. One study using mouse models dem-onstrated that knocking out the DNA ability to make the
epigenetic change in the nucleus accumbens following stress
increased resilience in female mice.
48
In general, stress appears to be more related to drug use in
women than it is in men; in response to stressful cues, women
experience greater craving than men.49Specialized Centers of
Research-funded work by Brady et al. demonstrated that wo-men with SUD have a greater stress response, a blunted cortisol
response, and an increased heart rate response to stressful
stimuli compared to men with SUD. The lowered cortisolresponse is of particular interest since the release of cortisol
stops the stress response in the nervous system. Effectively,
w o m e nw i t hS U Da r es t u c ki nas tressful feedback loop.
50–52
The treatment of OUD with methadone and buprenor-
phine, both of which are very effective treatments for men
and women, is currently reaching between 20% and 30% ofpeople with OUD. Naloxone and naltrexone, medicines usedto reverse overdoses, are equally effective for women and
men, although naltrexone may have more side effects in
women. Adrenergic agents, such as clonidine for the treat-ment of withdrawal and, as new evidence suggests, relapse,
may be more effective in women. Fox et al. demonstrated that
treatment with guanfacine decreased cocaine cravings inwomen versus placebo, whereas men saw no effect/increased
cravings.
53Similarly, the MOTHER study of pregnant women
treated with either methadone or buprenorphine demonstratedthat buprenorphine-treated infants had fewer hospital days andshorter duration of treatment for neonatal abstinence, although
there were higher maternal dropout rates.
54
While women tend to do as well as men in treatment, after
controlling for comorbidity, economic factors, and other744 SCHWEINHART ET AL.
important individual-level factors, it is important to consider
gender-speciﬁc barriers to treatment that are unique to wo-
men. Women are disproportionally affected by issues, suchas child care, lack of resources, partners with SUD, uniquehealth problems for women, parenting classes, and partic-
ularly, co-occurring disorders, post-traumatic stress dis-
order, depression, and anxiety. A recovery model tested byGreenﬁeld that focused solely on women has shown higher
satisfaction ratings from women, although treatment out-
comes were like other programs. Women-only treatmentmay not be the answer to the differential effect of OUD on
women, but the exclusion of men may have led to higher
outcomes due to relational satisfaction.
In conclusion, OUD and opioid-related deaths continue to
rise, and while effective treatments, such as medication assisted
treatment, are available, they are not widely implemented.
Prescribers seem to understand that they need to lessen theextent to which they prescribe opioids, but this alone is not
solving the problem. The opioid problem is complicated by
comorbidities, psychiatric disorders, and gender differencesthat require complex and multifaceted solutions.
Discussion and Closing
Following the talks, a Q and A session centered predomi-
nantly around the opioid issue, such as ways to facilitate patient
transitions off opioids, how to address the gender inequality,and how to apply Team Science to the epidemic and elsewhere.
There was a discussion on how to begin to get teams organized
and focused, starting with the leadership of the organization.There was also a question about evaluation of coalition work
and resources for ensuring that a taskforce is on goal, to which
Drs. Cargill and Hall responded with follow-up resources.Many attendees asked about speciﬁc issues related to the opioid
crisis, such as surgical use of opioids, transgender issues, and
medical marijuana, as well as the panel’s opinion on speciﬁctreatments or resources for dealing with these issues. The panelsuggested evidence-based treatments, pointing to speciﬁc ref-
erences from the literature when applicable. Both attendees and
panelists agreed that it was difﬁcult to determine the appro-priate postsurgical dosage of pain relief and that practice-based
guidelines for dosage and length of administration would be
helpful. Importantly, the panel highlighted that the opioidproblem cannot be solved without interdisciplinary and trans-
disciplinary approaches that take into consideration the eco-
nomic, social, cultural, and especially community-level factorsaffecting SUDs. Dr. Cargill closed the symposium by thankingeveryone in attendance, particularly Drs. Hall and Brady.
Author Disclosure Statement
No competing ﬁnancial interests exist.
References
1. National Research Council and Committee on Population.
Explaining divergent levels of longevity in high-income
countries. Washington, DC: National Academies Press, 2011.
2. Hendi AS. Trends in US life expectancy gradients: The role
of changing educational composition. Int J Epidemiol 2015;
44:946–955.
3. Wilmoth JR, Boe C, Barbieri M. Geographic differences in
life expectancy at age 50 in the United States compared withother high-income countries. In Crimmins EM, Preston SH,
and Cohen B, (eds.): International Differences in Mortality
at Older Ages. Washington, DC: National Academies Press,
2010;333–366.
4. Dwyer-Lindgren L, Bertozzi-Villa A, Stubbs RW, et al.
Inequalities in life expectancy among US counties, 1980 to
2014: Temporal trends and key drivers. JAMA Intern Med
2017;177:1003–1011.
5. Montez JK, Zajacova A, Hayward MD. Explaining in-
equalities in women’s mortality between U.S. states. SSM
Popul Health 2016;2:561–571.
6. Wizemann TM. Sex-speciﬁc reporting of scientiﬁc re-
search: a workshop summary. Washington, DC: NationalAcademies Press, 2012.
7. Kassebaum NJ, Barber RM, Bhutta ZA, et al. Global, re-
gional, and national levels of maternal mortality, 1990–2015:
A systematic analysis for the global burden of disease study
2015. Lancet 2016;388:1775–1812.
8. Committee on Facilitating Interdisciplinary Research,
National Academy of Sciences, National Academy of
Engineering, Institute of Medicine. Facilitating interdisci-
plinary research. National Academies Press: Washington,
DC, 2004.
9. National Institutes of Health (NIH). Research on the health of
women of understudied, underrepresented and underreported
(U3) populations – an ORWH FY18 administrative supple-
ment (admin supp clinical trial optional). National Institutes
of Health Funding Opportunity Announcement Number PA-
18-676. Available at: https://grants.nih.gov/grants/guide/pa-
ﬁles/pa-18-676.html. Accessed May 31, 2019.
10. Rosenﬁeld PL. The potential of transdisciplinary research
for sustaining and extending linkages between the health
and social sciences. Soc Sci Med 1992;35:1343–1357.
11. Gray B. Enhancing transdisciplinary research through col-
laborative leadership. Am J Prev Med 2008;35:S124–S132.
12. Stokols D, Stokols D, Stipelman BA, et al. The ecology of
team science: Understanding contextual inﬂuences on
transdisciplinary collaboration. Am J Prev Med 2008;35:
S96–S115.
13. Hall KL, Stokols D, Stipelman BA, et al. Assessing
the value of team science: A study comparing center-
and investigator-initiated grants. Am J Prev Med 2012;
42:157–163.
14. Stvilia B, Hinnant C, Schindler K, et al. Team diversity and
publication patterns in a scientiﬁc laboratory. J Am Soc Inf
Sci Technol 2011;62:270–283.
15. Lungeanu A, Huang Y, Contractor NS. Understanding the
assembly of interdisciplinary teams and its impact on per-
formance. J Informetr 2014;8:59–70.
16. Misra S, Stokols D, Cheng L. The transdisciplinary orien-
tation scale: Factor structure and relation to the integrative
quality and scope of scientiﬁc publications. J Collab
Healthcare Transl Med 2015;3:1042.
17. Larivie `re V, Gingras Y, Sugimoto CR, Tsou A. Team size
matters: Collaboration and scientiﬁc impact since 1900.
J Assoc Inf Sci Technol 2015; 66:1323–1332.
18. Zeng XHT, Duch J, Sales-Pardo M, et al. Differences in
collaboration patterns across discipline, career stage, and
gender. PLoS Biol 2016;14:e1002573.
19. Abramo G, D’Angelo CA, Murgia G. Gender differences in
research collaboration. J Inf 2013;7:811–822.
20. Van Rijnsoever FJ, Hessels LK. Factors associated with
disciplinary and interdisciplinary research collaboration.
Res Policy 2011;40:463–472.ADDRESSING HEALTH CHALLENGES OF WOMEN ACROSS THE LIFE COURSE 745
21. Pezzoni M, Mairesse J, Stephan P, Lane J. Gender and the
publication output of graduate students: A case study. PLoS
One 2016;11:e0145146.
22. Conti A, Liu CC. Bringing the lab back in: Personnel
composition and scientiﬁc output at the MIT Department of
Biology. Res Policy 2015;44:1633–1644.
23. Bozeman B, Gaughan M. How do men and women differ in
research collaborations? An analysis of the collaborative
motives and strategies of academic researchers. Res Policy
2011;40:1393–1402.
24. Bales ME, Dine DC, Merrill JA, Johnson SB, Bakken S,
Weng C. Associating co-authorship patterns with publica-
tions in high-impact journals. J Biomed Inf 2014;52:311–318.
25. Murthy D, Lewis JP. Social media, collaboration, and sci-
entiﬁc organizations. Am Behav Sci 2015;59:149–171.
26. Wu L, Wang D, Evans JA. Large teams have developed
science and technology; small teams have disrupted it.
SSRN 2017.
27. Jones BF, Wuchty S, Uzzi B. Multi-university research
teams: Shifting impact, geography, and stratiﬁcation in
science. Science 2008;322:1259–1262.
28. Cummings JN, Kiesler S, Bosagh Zadeh R, Balakrishnan
AD. Group heterogeneity increases the risks of large group
size: A longitudinal study of productivity in research
groups. Psychol Sci 2013;24:880–890.
29. Vogel AL, Stipelman BA, Hall KL, Nebeling L, Stokols D,
Spruijt-Metz D. Pioneering the transdisciplinary team sci-
ence approach: Lessons learned from National Cancer In-
stitute grantees. J Transl Med Epidemiol 2014;2:pii:1027.
30. Cummings JN, Kiesler S. Collaborative research across
disciplinary and organizational boundaries. Social Stud Sci
2005;35:703–722.
31. Cummings JN, Kiesler S. Coordination costs and project
outcomes in multi-university collaborations. Res Policy
2007;36:1620–1634.
32. Gebbie KM, Meier BM, Bakken S, et al. Training for
interdisciplinary health research deﬁning the required
competencies. J Allied Health 2008;37:65–70.
33. National Research Council. Enhancing the effectiveness of
team science. Washington, DC: National Academies Press,
2015.
34. Hall KL, Vogel AL, Huang GC, et al. The science of team
science: A review of the empirical evidence and research
gaps on collaboration in science. Am Psychol 2018;73:532.
35. Team Science Toolkit. 2018. Available at: https://www
.teamsciencetoolkit.cancer.gov/Public/Home.aspx AccessedMay 31, 2019.
36. Rossen LM, Bastian B, Warner M, Khan D, Chong Y.
Drug poisoning mortality: United States, 1999–2017.
National Center for Health Statistics. 2019. Available at:
https://www.cdc.gov/nchs/data-visualization/drug-poisoning-
mortality/ Accessed May 31, 2019.
37. Campbell CI, Weisner C, Leresche L, et al. Age and gender
trends in long-term opioid analgesic use for noncancer pain.
Am J Public Health 2010;100:2541–2547.
38. CDC/NCHS. Overdose deaths involving opioids, by type of
opioid, United States, 2000–2016. Department of Health and
Human Services Services, Editor. Atlanta, GA: CDC, 2017.
39. Overdose Death Rates. 2017. Available at: https://www.drug
abuse.gov/related-topics/trends-s tatistics/overdose-death-rates.
Accessed June 14, 2018.
40. Cicero TJ, Ellis MS, Surratt HL, Kurtz SP. The changing face
of heroin use in the United States: A retrospective analysis of
the past 50 years. JAMA Psychiatry 2014;71:821–826.41. Kozhimannil KB, Graves AJ, Jarlenski M, Kennedy-
Hendricks A, Gollust S, Barry CL. Non-medical opioid use
and sources of opioids among pregnant and non-pregnant
reproductive-aged women. Drug Alcohol Depend 2017;
174:201–208.
42. Maeda A, Bateman BT, Clancy CR, Creanga AA, Leffert
LR. Opioid abuse and dependence during pregnancy:
Temporal trends and obstetrical outcomes. Anesthesiology
2014;121:1158–1165.
43. Kessler RC, Berglund P, Demler O, Jin R, Merikangas KR,
Walters EE. Lifetime prevalence and age-of-onset distribu-
tions of DSM-IV disorders in the National Comorbidity
Survey Replication. Arch Gen Psychiatry 2005;62:593–602.
44. Grant BF, Stinson FS, Dawson DA, Chou SP, Ruan WJ,
Pickering RP. Co-occurrence of 12-month alcohol and drug
use disorders and personality disorders in the United States.
Alcohol Res Health 2006;29:121–130.
45. Conway KP, Compton W, Stinson FS, Grant BF. Lifetime
comorbidity of DSM-IV mood and anxiety disorders and
speciﬁc drug use disorders: Results from the National
Epidemiologic Survey on Alcohol and Related Conditions.
J Clin Psychiatry 2006;67:247–257.
46. Dube SR, Felitti VJ, Dong M, Chapman DP, Giles WH, Anda
RF. Childhood abuse, neglect, and household dysfunction and
the risk of illicit drug use: The adverse childhood experiences
study. Pediatrics 2003;111:564–572.
47. Hyman SM, Paliwal P, Chaplin TM, Mazure CM, Roun-
saville BJ, Sinha R. Severity of childhood trauma is pre-
dictive of cocaine relapse outcomes in women but not men.
Drug Alcohol Depend 2008;92:208–216.
48. Hodes GE, Pfau ML, Purushothaman I, et al. Sex differences
in nucleus accumbens transcriptome proﬁles associated with
susceptibility versus resilience to subchronic variable stress.
J Neurosci 2015;35:16362–16376.
49. Potenza MN, Hong KI, Lacadie CM, Fulbright RK, Tuit
KL, Sinha R. Neural correlates of stress-induced and cue-
induced drug craving: Inﬂuences of sex and cocaine de-
pendence. Am J Psychiatry 2012;169:406–414.
50. Brady KT, Waldrop AE, McRae AL, et al. The impact
of alcohol dependence and posttraumatic stress disorder on
cold pressor task response. J Stud Alcohol 2006;67:700–706.
51. Back SE, Waldrop AE, Saladin ME, et al. Effects of gender
and cigarette smoking on reactivity to psychological and
pharmacological stress provo cation. Psychoneuroendocrinology
2008;33:560–568.
52. Moran-Santa Maria MM, McRae-Clark A, Baker NL, Ra-
makrishnan V, Brady KT. Yohimbine administration and
cue-reactivity in cocaine-dependent individuals. Psycho-
pharmacology 2014;231:4157–4165.
53. Fox HC, Seo D, Tuit K, et al. Guanfacine effects on stress,
drug craving and prefrontal activation in cocaine dependent
individuals: Preliminary ﬁndings. J Psychopharmacol 2012;
26:958–972.
54. Jones HE, Kaltenbach K, Heil SH, et al. Neonatal abstinence
syndrome after methadone or buprenorphine exposure.
N Engl J Med 2010;363:2320–2331.
Address correspondence to:
Janine Clayton, MD
6707 Democracy Blvd., Suite 400
Bethesda, MD 20892
E-mail: janine.clayton@nih.gov746 SCHWEINHART ET AL.
