CirculationCirculation. 2023;148:e9–e119. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000001168 August 29, 2023
Circulation is available at www.ahajournals.org/journal/circ e9*Writing committee members are required to recuse themselves from voting on sections to which their specific relationships with industry may apply; see Appendix 1  
for detailed information. †ACC/AHA representative. ‡National Lipid Association representative. §Preventive Cardiovascular Nurses Association representative. 
‖Former Joint Committee on Clinical Practice Guideline member; current member during the writing effort. ¶Society for Cardiovascular Angiography and Interventions 
representative. #Patient representative/lay stakeholder. **American Society for Preventive Cardiology representative. ††AHA/ACC Joint Committee on Clinical Data 
Standards. ‡‡American College of Clinical Pharmacy representative. §§AHA/ACC Joint Committee on Performance Measures.
Peer Review Committee Members and AHA/ACC Joint Committee on Clinical Practice Guidelines Members, see page e82.
The American Heart Association requests that this document be cited as follows: Virani SS, Newby LK, Arnold SV, Bittner V, Brewer LC, Demeter SH, Dixon DL, Fearon WF, Hess 
B, Johnson HM, Kazi DS, Kolte D, Kumbhani DJ, LoFaso J, Mahtta D, Mark DB, Minissian M, Navar AM, Patel AR, Piano MR, Rodriguez F, Talbot AW, Taqueti VR, Thomas RJ, van 
Diepen S, Wiggins B, Williams MS. 2023 AHA/ACC/ACCP/ASPC/NLA/PCNA guideline for the management of patients with chronic coronary disease: a report of the American 
Heart Association/American College of Cardiology Joint Committee on Clinical Practice Guidelines. Circulation. 2023;148:e9–e119. doi: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000001168
© 2023 by the American Heart Association, Inc., and the American College of Cardiology Foundation.CLINICAL PRACTICE GUIDELINE
2023 AHA/ACC/ACCP/ASPC/NLA/PCNA 
Guideline for the Management of Patients With 
Chronic Coronary Disease: A Report of the 
American Heart Association/American College  
of Cardiology Joint Committee on Clinical 
Practice Guidelines
Developed in Collaboration With and Endorsed by the American College of Clinical Pharmacy, American Society for Preventive 
Cardiology, National Lipid Association, and Preventive Cardiovascular Nurses Association
Endorsed by the Society for Cardiovascular Angiography and Interventions
Writing Committee Members*
Salim S. Virani, MD, PhD, FACC, FAHA, FASPC, Chair†; L. Kristin Newby, MD, MHS, FACC, FAHA, Vice Chair†;  
Suzanne V. Arnold, MD, MHA, FAHA; Vera Bittner, MD, MSPH, FACC, FAHA, MNLA‡; LaPrincess C. Brewer, MD, MPH, FACC, FASPC;  
Susan Halli Demeter, DNP, FNLA, FPCNA§; Dave L. Dixon, PharmD, FAHA, FACC, FCCP, FNLA||;  
William F. Fearon, MD, FAHA, FACC, FSCAI¶; Beverly Hess, MSW#; Heather M. Johnson, MD, MS, FAHA, FACC, FASPC**;  
Dhruv S. Kazi, MD, MSc, MS, FAHA, FACC; Dhaval Kolte, MD, PhD, FACC, FSCAI††; Dharam J. Kumbhani, MD, SM, FAHA, FACC, FSCAI;  
Jim LoFaso#; Dhruv  Mahtta, DO, MBA; Daniel B. Mark, MD, MPH, FACC, FAHA||; Margo Minissian, PhD, ACNP, FAHA;  
Ann Marie Navar, MD, PhD, FAHA, FACC, FASPC; Amit R. Patel, MD, FACC; Mariann R. Piano, RN, PhD, FAHA||;  
Fatima Rodriguez, MD, MPH, FACC, FAHA; Amy W. Talbot, MPH†; Viviany R. Taqueti, MD, MPH, FACC, FAHA;  
Randal J. Thomas, MD, MS, FACC, FAHA; Sean van Diepen, MD, MSc, FAHA; Barbara Wiggins, PharmD, MBA, FACC, FNLA, FCCP‡‡;  
Marlene S. Williams, MD, FACC§§ 
AIM: The “2023 AHA/ACC/ACCP/ASPC/NLA/PCNA Guideline for the Management of Patients With Chronic Coronary 
Disease” provides an update to and consolidates new evidence since the “2012 ACCF/AHA/ACP/AATS/PCNA/SCAI/STS 
Guideline for the Diagnosis and Management of Patients With Stable Ischemic Heart Disease” and the corresponding “2014 
ACC/AHA/AATS/PCNA/SCAI/STS Focused Update of the Guideline for the Diagnosis and Management of Patients With 
Stable Ischemic Heart Disease.”
METHODS : A comprehensive literature search was conducted from September 2021 to May 2022. Clinical studies, systematic 
reviews and meta-analyses, and other evidence conducted on human participants were identified that were published in 
English from MEDLINE (through PubMed), EMBASE, the Cochrane Library, Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality, 
and other selected databases relevant to this guideline.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on November 12, 2025

CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINESAugust 29, 2023 Circulation. 2023;148:e9–e119. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000001168
Virani et al 2023 AHA/ACC/ACCP/ASPC/NLA/PCNA Chronic Coronary Disease Guideline e10STRUCTURE: This guideline provides an evidenced-based and patient-centered approach to management of patients with chronic 
coronary disease, considering social determinants of health and incorporating the principles of shared decision-making and 
team-based care. Relevant topics include general approaches to treatment decisions, guideline-directed management and 
therapy to reduce symptoms and future cardiovascular events, decision-making pertaining to revascularization in patients 
with chronic coronary disease, recommendations for management in special populations, patient follow-up and monitoring, 
evidence gaps, and areas in need of future research. Where applicable, and based on availability of cost-effectiveness data, 
cost–value recommendations are also provided for clinicians. Many recommendations from previously published guidelines 
have been updated with new evidence, and new recommendations have been created when supported by published data.
Key Words: AHA Scientific Statements ◼ acute coronary syndrome ◼ air pollution ◼ angina ◼ antiplatelet therapy ◼ aspirin ◼ atherosclerosis  
◼ autoimmune diseases ◼ cardiac events ◼ cardiac rehabilitation ◼ cardiovascular diseases ◼ colchicine ◼ coronary artery disease  
◼ coronary disease ◼ cost-benefit analysis ◼ depression ◼ diabetes ◼ type 2 diabetes ◼ diet ◼ diet therapy ◼ dietary supplements  
◼ drug therapy ◼ dual antiplatelet therapy ◼ environmental exposure ◼ exercise tolerance ◼ factor Xa inhibitors ◼ fibrinolytic agents  
◼ glucagon-like peptide-1 receptor agonists ◼ guideline-directed management and therapy ◼ health equity ◼ heart disease risk factors  
◼ heart failure ◼ health care outcome assessments ◼ hormone replacement therapy ◼ hypercholesterolemia ◼ hypertension ◼ immunization  
◼ ischemic heart disease ◼ mental health ◼ multidisciplinary ◼ myocardial ischemia ◼ outcomes ◼ outpatient ◼ patient care team  
◼ pharmacology ◼ pregnancy ◼ proton pump inhibitors ◼ quality of life ◼ safety ◼ secondary prevention ◼ sexual behavior ◼ sexual health  
◼ smoking cessation ◼ shared decision-making ◼ social determinants of health ◼ sodium-glucose cotransporter 2 inhibitors  
◼ spontaneous coronary artery dissection ◼ stress ◼ therapeutic use ◼ therapy ◼ vaccination
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Abstract  .......................................... e9
Top 10 Take-Home Messages . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . e11
Preamble .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . e11
 1. Introduction  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . e13
 1.1. Methodology and Evidence Review  . . . . . . e13
 1.2. Organization of the Writing  
Committee  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . e13
 1.3. Document Review and Approval  . . . . . . . . e13
 1.4. Scope of the Guideline  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . e13
 1.5. Class of Recommendations  
and Level of Evidence  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . e16
 1.6. Abbreviations  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . e17
 2. Epidemiology and General Principles . . . . . . . . . . e17
 3. Evaluation, Diagnosis, and Risk  
Stratification   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . e20
 3.1. Diagnostic Evaluation  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . e20
 3.2. Risk Stratification and Relationship to 
Treatment Selection  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . e21
 4. Treatment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . e23
 4.1. General Approach to Treatment  
Decisions  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . e23
 4.1.1. Team-Based Approach   . . . . . . . . . e24
 4.1.2. Patient Education   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . e25
 4.1.3. Shared Decision-Making . . . . . . . . e26
 4.1.4. Social Determinants  
of Health   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . e27
 4.2. Guideline-Directed Management  
and Therapy  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . e29
 4.2.1. Nutrition, Including  
Supplements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . e29
 4.2.2. Mental Health Conditions . . . . . . . e31
 4.2.3. Tobacco Products   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . e33
 4.2.4. Alcohol and Substance Use . . . . . e34
 4.2.5. Sexual Health and Activity   . . . . . . e36   4.2.6. Lipid Management   . . . . . . . . . . . . . e37
    4.2.7 . Blood Pressure Management . . . . e42
   4.2.8. SGL T2 Inhibitors and GLP-1 
Receptor Agonists . . . . . . . . . . . . . . e43
   4.2.9. Weight Management   . . . . . . . . . . . e45
 4.2.10. Cardiac Rehabilitation   . . . . . . . . . . e47
 4.2.11. Physical Activity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . e48
 4.2.12. Environmental Exposures . . . . . . . e49
 4.3. Medical Therapy to Prevent  
Cardiovascular Events and Manage 
Symptoms  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . e50
 4.3.1. Antiplatelet Therapy and Oral 
Anticoagulants . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . e50
 4.3.2. Beta Blockers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . e55
 4.3.3. Renin-Angiotensin-Aldosterone 
Inhibitors . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . e56
 4.3.4. Colchicine   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . e57
 4.3.5. Immunizations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . e58
 4.3.6. Medical Therapy for Relief  
of Angina . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . e59
 4.3.7 . Management of Refractory  
Angina   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . e60
 4.3.8. Chelation Therapy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . e60
 5. Revascularization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . e61
 5.1. Revascularization  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . e61
 5.2. Revascularization: PCI Versus CABG  . . . .e64
 6. Special Populations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . e65
 6.1. Existing Heart Diseases  
and Conditions  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . e65
 6.1.1. Chronic Management After  
SCAD   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . e65
 6.1.2. Ischemia With Nonobstructive 
Coronary Arteries   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . e66
 6.1.3. HF With Preserved or Reduced 
Ejection Fraction   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . e68
 6.2. CAD With Valvular Heart Disease  . . . . . . . e68
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on November 12, 2025

CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINESCirculation. 2023;148:e9–e119. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000001168 August 29, 2023
Virani et al 2023 AHA/ACC/ACCP/ASPC/NLA/PCNA Chronic Coronary Disease Guideline e11 6.3. Young Adults  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . e69
 6.4. Cancer  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . e70
 6.5. Women, Including Pregnancy and 
Postmenopausal Hormone Therapy  . . . . . e71
 6.6. Older Adults  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . e74
 6.7 . Chronic Kidney Disease  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . e75
 6.8. HIV and Autoimmune Disorders  . . . . . . . . . e75
 6.9. Cardiac Allograft Vasculopathy in  
Heart Transplant Recipients  . . . . . . . . . . . . e77
 7 . Patient Follow-Up: Monitoring and Managing 
Symptoms   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . e79
 7 .1. Follow-Up Plan and Testing in  
Stable Patients  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . e79
 8. Other Important Considerations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . e80
 8.1. Cost and Value Considerations  . . . . . . . . . . e80
 8.2. Evidence Gaps and Areas of Future 
Research Needs  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . e81
References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . e83
Appendix 1
Author Relationships With Industry and  
Other Entities  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . e114
Appendix 2
Reviewer Relationships With Industry and  
Other Entities  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . e118
TOP 10 TAKE-HOME MESSAGES FOR 
CHRONIC CORONARY DISEASE
 1. Emphasis is on team-based, patient-centered care 
that considers social determinants of health along 
with associated costs while incorporating shared 
decision-making in risk assessment, testing, and 
treatment.
 2. Nonpharmacologic therapies, including healthy 
dietary habits and exercise, are recommended for 
all patients with chronic coronary disease (CCD).
 3. Patients with CCD who are free from contraindi-
cations are encouraged to participate in habitual 
physical activity, including activities to reduce sit-
ting time and to increase aerobic and resistance 
exercise. Cardiac rehabilitation for eligible patients 
provides significant cardiovascular benefits, includ-
ing decreased morbidity and mortality outcomes.
 4. Use of sodium glucose cotransporter 2 inhibitors 
and glucagon-like peptide-1 receptor agonists are 
recommended for select groups of patients with 
CCD, including groups without diabetes.
 5. New recommendations for beta-blocker use in 
patients with CCD: (a) Long-term beta-blocker 
therapy is not recommended to improve outcomes 
in patients with CCD in the absence of myocar-
dial infarction in the past year, left ventricular ejec-
tion fraction ≤50%, or another primary indication 
for beta-blocker therapy; and (b) Either a calcium channel blocker or beta blocker is recommended 
as first-line antianginal therapy.
 6. Statins remain first line therapy for lipid lowering 
in patients with CCD. Several adjunctive therapies 
(eg, ezetimibe, PCSK9 [proprotein convertase sub-
tilisin/kexin type 9] inhibitors, inclisiran, bempedoic 
acid) may be used in select populations, although 
clinical outcomes data are unavailable for novel 
agents such as inclisiran.
 7 . Shorter durations of dual antiplatelet therapy are 
safe and effective in many circumstances, particu-
larly when the risk of bleeding is high and the isch-
emic risk is low to moderate.
 8. The use of nonprescription or dietary supplements, 
including fish oil and omega-3 fatty acids or vitamins, 
is not recommended in patients with CCD given the 
lack of benefit in reducing cardiovascular events.
 9. Routine periodic anatomic or ischemic testing 
without a change in clinical or functional status is 
not recommended for risk stratification or to guide 
therapeutic decision-making in patients with CCD.
 10. Although e-cigarettes increase the likelihood of 
successful smoking cessation compared with nico-
tine replacement therapy, because of the lack of 
long-term safety data and risks of sustained use, 
e-cigarettes are not recommended as first-line 
therapy for smoking cessation.
PREAMBLE
Since 1980, the American College of Cardiology (ACC) and 
American Heart Association (AHA) have translated scientif-
ic evidence into clinical practice guidelines with recommen-
dations to improve cardiovascular health. These guidelines, 
which are based on systematic methods to evaluate and 
classify evidence, provide a foundation for the delivery of 
quality cardiovascular care. The ACC and AHA sponsor the 
development and publication of clinical practice guidelines 
without commercial support, and members volunteer their 
time to the writing and review efforts. Guidelines are official 
policy of the ACC and AHA. For some guidelines, the ACC 
and AHA collaborate with other organizations.
Intended Use
Clinical practice guidelines provide recommendations 
applicable to patients with or at risk of developing cardio-
vascular disease (CVD). The focus is on medical practice 
in the United States, but these guidelines are relevant to 
patients throughout the world. Although guidelines may 
be used to inform regulatory or payer decisions, the in-
tent is to improve quality of care and align with patients’ 
interests. Guidelines are intended to define practices 
meeting the needs of patients in most, but not all, cir-
cumstances and should not replace clinical judgment.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on November 12, 2025

CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINESAugust 29, 2023 Circulation. 2023;148:e9–e119. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000001168
Virani et al 2023 AHA/ACC/ACCP/ASPC/NLA/PCNA Chronic Coronary Disease Guideline e12Clinical Implementation
Management, in accordance with guideline recommenda-
tions, is effective only when followed by both practitioners  
and patients. Adherence to recommendations can be 
enhanced by shared decision-making between clinicians 
and patients, with patient engagement in selecting inter-
ventions on the basis of individual values, preferences, 
and associated conditions and comorbidities.
Methodology and Modernization
The AHA/ACC Joint Committee on Clinical Practice 
Guidelines (Joint Committee) continuously reviews, up-
dates, and modifies guideline methodology on the basis 
of published standards from organizations, including the 
National Academy of Medicine (formerly the Institute of 
Medicine),1,2 and on the basis of internal reevaluation. Sim-
ilarly, presentation and delivery of guidelines are reevalu-
ated and modified in response to evolving technologies 
and other factors to optimally facilitate dissemination of in-
formation to health care professionals at the point of care.
Numerous modifications to the guidelines have been 
implemented to make them shorter and enhance “user 
friendliness.” Guidelines are written and presented in a 
modular, “knowledge chunk” format in which each chunk 
includes a table of recommendations, a brief synopsis, 
recommendation-specific supportive text and, when 
appropriate, flow diagrams or additional tables. Hyper-
linked references are provided for each modular knowl-
edge chunk to facilitate quick access and review.
In recognition of the importance of cost–value con-
siderations, in certain guidelines, when appropriate and 
feasible, an assessment of value for a drug, device, or 
intervention may be performed in accordance with the 
ACC/AHA methodology.3
To ensure that guideline recommendations remain cur-
rent, new data will be reviewed on an ongoing basis by 
the writing committee and staff. When applicable, recom-
mendations will be updated with new evidence or new 
recommendations will be created when supported by 
published evidence-based data. Going forward, targeted 
sections/knowledge chunks will be revised dynamically 
after publication and timely peer review of potentially 
practice-changing science. The previous designations of 
“full revision” and “focused update” will be phased out. 
For additional information and policies on guideline devel-
opment, readers may consult the ACC/AHA guideline 
methodology manual4 and other methodology articles.5–7
Selection of Writing Committee Members
The Joint Committee strives to ensure that the guide-
line writing committee contains requisite content exper-
tise and is representative of the broader cardiovascular 
community by selection of experts across a spectrum of 
backgrounds, representing different geographic regions, sexes, races, ethnicities, intellectual perspectives/biases, 
and clinical practice settings. Organizations and profes-
sional societies with related interests and expertise are 
invited to participate as collaborators.
Relationships With Industry and Other Entities
The ACC and AHA have rigorous policies and methods to 
ensure that documents are developed without bias or im-
proper influence. The complete policy on relationships with 
industry and other entities (RWI) can be found online. Ap-
pendix 1 of the guideline lists writing committee members’ 
comprehensive and relevant RWI; for the purposes of full 
transparency, comprehensive and relevant disclosure infor-
mation for the Joint Committee is also available online.
Evidence Review and Evidence Review 
Committees
In developing recommendations, the writing committee 
uses evidence-based methodologies that are based on all 
available data.4,5 Literature searches focus on randomized 
controlled trials (RCTs) but also include registries, nonran-
domized comparative and descriptive studies, case series, 
cohort studies, systematic reviews, and expert opinion. 
Only key references are cited.
An independent evidence review committee is com-
missioned when there are ≥ 1 questions deemed of 
utmost clinical importance and merit formal systematic 
review to determine which patients are most likely to ben-
efit from a drug, device, or treatment strategy, and to what 
degree. Criteria for commissioning an evidence review 
committee and formal systematic review include absence 
of a current authoritative systematic review, feasibility of 
defining the benefit and risk in a time frame consistent 
with the writing of a guideline, relevance to a substantial 
number of patients, and likelihood that the findings can 
be translated into actionable recommendations. Evidence 
review committee members may include methodologists, 
epidemiologists, clinicians, and biostatisticians. Recom-
mendations developed by the writing committee on the 
basis of the systematic review are marked “SR”.
Guideline-Directed Management and Therapy
The term guideline-directed management and therapy 
(GDMT) encompasses clinical evaluation, diagnostic test-
ing, and both pharmacological and procedural treatments. 
For these and all recommended drug treatment regimens, 
the reader should confirm dosage with product insert ma-
terial and evaluate for contraindications and interactions. 
Recommendations are limited to drugs, devices, and 
treatments approved for clinical use in the United States.
Joshua A. Beckman, MD, MS, FACC, FAHA
Chair, AHA/ACC Joint Committee on  
Clinical Practice Guidelines
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on November 12, 2025

CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINESCirculation. 2023;148:e9–e119. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000001168 August 29, 2023
Virani et al 2023 AHA/ACC/ACCP/ASPC/NLA/PCNA Chronic Coronary Disease Guideline e131. INTRODUCTION
1.1. Methodology and Evidence Review
The recommendations listed in this guideline are, when-
ever possible, evidence based. An initial extensive evi-
dence review—which included literature derived from 
research involving human subjects, published in English, 
and indexed in MEDLINE (through PubMed), EMBASE, 
the Cochrane Library, the Agency for Healthcare Re-
search and Quality, and other selected databases rel-
evant to this guideline—was conducted from September 
24, 2021, to May 2022. Key search words included but 
were not limited to the following: AHA/ACC Clinical Prac-
tice Guidelines; acute coronary syndrome; angina; cardiac 
rehabilitation; cardiovascular diseases; coronary artery dis-
ease; coronary disease; diabetes; type 2 diabetes; diet; 
diet therapy; dietary supplements; drug therapy; dual an-
tiplatelet therapy; factor Xa inhibitors; hypertension; out-
comes; quality of life; secondary prevention; therapy.
Additional relevant studies, which were published 
through November 2022 during the guideline writing 
process, were also considered by the writing commit-
tee and added to the evidence tables when appropriate. 
The final evidence tables are included in the Online Data 
Supplement and summarize the evidence used by the 
writing committee to formulate recommendations. Refer-
ences selected and published in the present document 
are representative and not all-inclusive.
The ACC and AHA have acknowledged the importance 
of value in health care to include development of cost–value 
statements for clinical practice recommendations. Available 
cost-effectiveness data were determined to be sufficient 
to support 9 specific recommendations in this guideline 
(Section 4.2.6, “Lipid Management”; Section 4.2.8, “SGL T2 
Inhibitors and GLP-1 Receptor Agonists”; Section 5.1, 
“Revascularization”; and Section 8.1, “Cost and Value Consid-
erations”). As a result, a Level of Value was assigned to those 
recommendations on the basis of the “ACC/AHA Statement 
on Cost/Value Methodology in Clinical Practice Guidelines 
and Performance Measures,”1 as shown in Table 1. Available 
quality-of-life (QOL) data were deemed to be insufficient to 
support specific recommendations in this guideline.
1.2. Organization of the Writing Committee
The writing committee consisted of general cardiologists, 
interventional cardiologists, cardiovascular surgeons, car-
diac imaging experts, advance practice nurses, clinical 
pharmacists, health economists, and lay/patient repre-
sentatives. The writing committee included representa-
tives from the AHA, ACC, American College of Clinical 
Pharmacy (ACCP), American Society for Preventive Car-
diology (ASPC), National Lipid Association (NLA), and 
Preventive Cardiovascular Nurses Association (PCNA). 
Appendix 1 of the current document lists writing commit-
tee members’ comprehensive and relevant RWI.1.3. Document Review and Approval
This document was reviewed by 2 official reviewers each 
nominated by the ACC and AHA; 1 reviewer each from 
the ACCP, ASPC, NLA, PCNA, and 6 individual content 
reviewers. Reviewers’ RWI information was distributed to 
the writing committee and is published in this document 
(Appendix 2).
This document was approved for publication by the 
governing bodies of the ACC and the AHA and was 
endorsed by the ACCP, ASPC, NLA, PCNA, and Society 
for Cardiovascular Angiography and Interventions.
1.4. Scope of the Guideline
The scope of the “2023 AHA/ACC/ACCP/ASPC/
NLA/PCNA Guideline for the Management of Pa-
tients With Chronic Coronary Disease” (referred to 
hereafter as the “2023 CCD guideline”) is to provide 
an update to and consolidate new evidence since the 
publication of the “2012 ACCF/AHA/ACP/AATS/
PCNA/SCAI/STS Guideline for the Diagnosis and 
Management of Patients With Stable Ischemic Heart 
Disease”3 and the “2014 ACC/AHA/AATS/PCNA/
SCAI/STS Focused Update of the Guideline for the 
Diagnosis and Management of Patients With Stable 
Ischemic Heart Disease” and will replace these prior 
guidelines.4 This current document provides a patient-
centered approach to management of chronic coro-
nary disease (CCD) incorporating the principles of 
shared decision-making, social determinants of health 
(SDOH), and team-based care. Where applicable and 
based on availability of cost-effectiveness data, value 
recommendations are also provided for clinicians.Table 1. Level of Value for Clinical Guideline  
Recommendations*
Level of Value for Clinical Guideline Recommendations* 
Level of Value
High value: Better outcomes at lower cost or ICER <$50 000 per QAL Y 
gained
Intermediate value: $50 000 to <$150 000 per QAL Y gained
Low value: ≥$150 000 per QAL Y gained
Uncertain value: Value examined but data are insufficient to draw a  
conclusion because of no studies, low-quality studies, conflicting studies, or 
prior studies that are no longer relevant
Not assessed: Value not assessed by the writing committee
Proposed abbreviations for each value recommendation:
Level of Value: H indicates high value; I, intermediate value; L, low value; 
U, uncertain value; and NA, value not assessed.
*Figures used in this table are based on US GDP data from 2012 and were 
obtained from WHO-CHOICE Cost-Effectiveness Thresholds.2
GDP indicates gross domestic product; ICER, incremental cost-effectiveness 
ratio; QAL Y, quality-adjusted life-years; and WHO-CHOICE, World Health Orga-
nization Choosing Interventions that are Cost-Effective.
Reproduced with permission from Anderson JL, et al.1 Copyright 2014 Ameri-
can Heart Association, Inc., and the American College of Cardiology.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on November 12, 2025

CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINESAugust 29, 2023 Circulation. 2023;148:e9–e119. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000001168
Virani et al 2023 AHA/ACC/ACCP/ASPC/NLA/PCNA Chronic Coronary Disease Guideline e14The writing committee acknowledges that care of 
patients with CCD is a continuum from postacute care 
in patients presenting with chest pain, acute coronary 
syndromes (ACS), or both to outpatient CCD-related 
management. The primary intended audience for this 
guideline is clinicians in primary care and cardiol-
ogy specialty who care for patients with CCD in the 
outpatient setting. It aims to provide succinct recom-
mendations in the domains of diagnostic evaluation, 
symptom relief, improvement in QOL, and reduc-
tion of future atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease 
(ASCVD)–related events and heart failure (HF) in 
patients with CCD. The recommendations provided in 
this guideline pertain to the chronic outpatient care of 
patients with CCD. Clinicians are referred to the rel-
evant guidelines when evaluating patients with acute 
chest pain, ACS, or both.5–9 See Table 2 for other rel-
evant guidelines.
1.4.1. CCD Definition
This guideline is intended to apply to the following cat-
egories of patients in the outpatient setting:
 • Patients discharged after admission for an ACS 
event or after coronary revascularization procedure 
and after stabilization of all acute cardiovascular 
issues.
 • Patients with left ventricular (L V) systolic dys-
function and known or suspected coronary artery 
disease (CAD) or those with established cardiomy-
opathy deemed to be of ischemic origin.
 • Patients with stable angina symptoms (or ischemic 
equivalents such as dyspnea or arm pain with exer-
tion) medically managed with or without positive 
results of an imaging test.
 • Patients with angina symptoms and evidence of 
coronary vasospasm or microvascular angina.
 • Patients diagnosed with CCD based solely on the 
results of a screening study (stress test, coronary 
computed tomography angiography [CTA]), and the 
treating clinician concludes that the patient has 
coronary disease.
This guideline is structured to address epidemiology 
and general principles in the management and transi-
tion of care in patients with CCD (Section 2, “Epidemiol-
ogy/General Principles”). This is followed by evaluation 
of patients with CCD presenting with angina symptoms 
and risk stratification for future CVD events in patients 
with CCD (Section 3, “Evaluation, Diagnosis, and Risk 
Stratification”). Section 4, “Treatment” focuses on guid-
ing principles in the management of patients with 
CCD (Section 4.1, “General Approach to Treatment 
Decisions”), overview of lifestyle and medical therapy 
(Section 4.2, “Guideline-Directed Management and 
Therapy”), and medical therapies to reduce cardiovascu-
lar events and manage symptoms (Section 4.3, “Medical Therapy to Prevent Cardiovascular Events and Manage 
Symptoms”) in patients with CCD. This is followed by 
key considerations in decision-making related to revas-
cularization in patients with CCD (Section 5, “Revascu-
larization”). Special populations with key considerations 
are discussed next (Section 6, “Special Populations”), 
followed by recommendations related to follow-up and 
monitoring of patients with CCD (Section 7 , “Patient Fol-
low-up: Monitoring and Managing Symptoms”). Cost and 
value considerations while treating patients with CCD 
and future research needs in patients with CCD are 
covered in Section 8 (“Other Important Considerations”). 
Where applicable, key recommendations from ACC/
AHA guidelines and other scientific statements (Table 
2) pertinent to outpatient management of patients with 
CCD are referenced and discussed. Readers should 
refer to these ACC/AHA guidelines and scientific state-
ments for further details.
The writing committee acknowledges several prin-
ciples while managing patients with CCD. First, the 
population of patients with CCD is heterogenous, and 
the risk of future cardiovascular events is not uniform 
across this patient population. Therefore, clinicians 
should prioritize therapies based on a patient’s future 
risk of CVD-related events. Second, symptom relief 
and improvement in QOL are extremely important 
considerations in patients with CCD. In several cir-
cumstances and after shared decision-making, clini-
cians may, as a first step, recommend therapies that 
improve symptom relief without necessarily improving 
cardiovascular outcomes. Third, several domains in 
the management of patients with CCD (eg, lifestyle, 
medical therapy, management of symptoms, and initial 
work-up) can be effectively performed by primary care 
clinicians. Therefore, this guideline acknowledges 
the principle of collaboration between clinicians in 
primary care and cardiology specialties. Lastly, the 
writing committee acknowledges that asymptomatic 
patients with significant coronary artery calcium noted 
on cardiac computed tomography (CT) or chest CT 
performed for noncardiac indications showing exten-
sive coronary artery calcifications without history of 
a previous ASCVD event, have a high risk of future 
ASCVD events. Although this guideline does not 
address those patients, aggressive lifestyle manage-
ment and the use of evidence-based medical thera-
pies to prevent further progression of atherosclerosis 
and to reduce the risk of future cardiovascular events 
remain important considerations in such patients. 
Readers are referred to the appropriate ACC/AHA 
guidelines that address ASCVD risk reduction in this 
patient phenotype.7 ,10
In developing the 2023 CCD guideline, the writing 
committee reviewed previously published guidelines 
and related scientific statements. Table 2 contains a 
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on November 12, 2025

CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINESCirculation. 2023;148:e9–e119. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000001168 August 29, 2023
Virani et al 2023 AHA/ACC/ACCP/ASPC/NLA/PCNA Chronic Coronary Disease Guideline e15Table 2. Associated AHA/ACC Guidelines
Title Organization Publication Year 
(Reference) 
Guidelines
  Secondary prevention and risk reduction therapy in coronary and other atherosclerotic 
diseaseAHA/ACCF 201111
  Stable ischemic heart disease ACC/AHA/AATS/PCNA/SCAI/STS 20123
  Overweight and obesity in adults AHA/ACC/TOS 201312
  Focused update on stable ischemic heart disease ACC/AHA 20144
  Focused update on DAPT with coronary artery disease ACC/AHA 201613
  Ventricular arrhythmias and the prevention of sudden cardiac death AHA/ACC/HRS 201714
  Management of blood cholesterol AHA/ACC/AACVPR/AAPA/ABC/ACPM/ADA/
AGS/APhA/ASPC/NLA/PCNA201810
  Prevention, detection, evaluation, and management of high blood pressure in adults ACC/AHA/AAPA/ABC/ACPM/AGS/APhA/
ASH/ASPC/NMA/PCNA201815
  Focused update on patients with atrial fibrillation AHA/ACC/HRS 201916
  Primary prevention of CVD ACC/AHA 20197
  Valvular heart disease ACC/AHA 202117
  Coronary artery revascularization ACC/AHA/AATS/STS/SCAI 20218
  Evaluation and diagnosis of chest pain AHA/ACC/ASE/CHEST/SAEM/SCCT/SCMR 20216
  Management of heart failure AHA/ACC/HFSA 202218
Scientific Statements
  Core components of cardiac rehabilitation and secondary prevention programs AHA 200719
  Sexual activity and CVD AHA 201220
  Depression and poor prognosis among patients with CHD AHA 201421
  Hypertension in patients with CAD AHA 201522
  Management of clinically significant drug-drug interactions with statins and select 
agents used in patients with CVDAHA 201623
  Dietary pattern to achieve adherence to AHA/ACC guidelines AHA/ACC 201624
  Spontaneous coronary artery dissection AHA 201825
  CVD in people living with HIV AHA 201926
  Cardiovascular considerations and pregnant patients AHA 202027
  Clinical management of stable CAD and type 2 diabetes AHA 202028
  Psychological health, well-being, and the mind-heart-body connection AHA 202129
  Air pollution and the impact on CVD ACC/AHA/ESC 202130
  Cardio-oncology drug interactions AHA 202231
Consensus Document/Reports/Presidential Advisory
  Hypertension in elderly ACCF/AHA 201132
  Diagnostic catheterization ACCF/SCAI/AATS/AHA/ASE/ASNC/HFSA/
HRS/SCCM/SCCT/SCMR/STS201233
  Tobacco cessation treatment ACC 201834
  Novel therapies for cardiovascular risk reduction in patients with type 2 diabetes ACC 202035
  ASCVD risk reduction in patients with persistent hypertriglyceridemia ACC 202136
  Anticoagulant and antiplatelet therapy in patients with AF or VT undergoing PCI or with 
ASCVDACC 202137
  Life’s Essential 8 and cardiovascular health AHA 202238
AACVPR indicates American Association of Cardiovascular and Pulmonary Rehabilitation; AAPA, American Academy of Physician Associates (formerly American Academy 
of Physician Assistants); AATS, American Association for Thoracic Surgery; ABC, Association of Black Cardiologists; ACC, American College of Cardiology; ACCF, American 
College of Cardiology Foundation; ACP, American College of Chest Physicians; ACPM, American College of Preventive Medicine; ADA, American Diabetes Association; AF, atrial 
fibrillation; AGS, American Geriatrics Society; AHA, American Heart Association; APhA, American Pharmacists Association; ASCVD, atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease; ASE, 
American Society of Echocardiography; ASH, American Society of Hypertension; ASNC, American Society of Nuclear Cardiology; ASPC, American Society for Preventive Cardi-
ology; CAD, coronary artery disease; CHD, coronary heart disease; CHEST, American College of Chest Physicians; CVD, cardiovascular disease; DAPT, dual antiplatelet therapy; 
ESC, European Society of Cardiology; HFSA, Heart Failure Society of America; HRS, Heart Rhythm Society; NLA, National Lipid Association; NMA, National Medical Association; 
PCI, percutaneous coronary intervention; PCNA, Preventive Cardiovascular Nurses Association; SAEM, Society for Academic Emergency Medicine; SCAI, Society for Coronary 
Angiography and Interventions; SCCM, Society of Critical Care Medicine; SCCT, Society of Cardiovascular Computed Tomography; SCAI, Society for Cardiovascular Angiography 
and Interventions; SCMR, Society for Cardiovascular Magnetic Resonance; STS, Society of Thoracic Surgery; TOS, The Obesity Society; and VT, venous thromboembolism.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on November 12, 2025

CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINESAugust 29, 2023 Circulation. 2023;148:e9–e119. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000001168
Virani et al 2023 AHA/ACC/ACCP/ASPC/NLA/PCNA Chronic Coronary Disease Guideline e16list of these publications deemed pertinent to this writ-
ing effort. It is intended for use as a resource, obviating 
the need to repeat existing guideline recommendations. 
Some recommendations have been carried forward 
from previously published guidelines. If unchanged, 
those recommendations remain current. Any changes 
to the formatting or content of these recommendations 
are defined as:
 • Modified: formatting changes (eg, minor modifica-
tions such as PICO[TS] structure)
 • Adapted: substantive changes (eg, major adap-
tations, such as a change in COR, LOE, drug or 
device classification).Changes are depicted in a footnote below the recom-
mendation tables.
1.5. Class of Recommendations and Level of 
Evidence
The Class of Recommendation (COR) indicates the 
strength of recommendation, encompassing the estimat-
ed magnitude and certainty of benefit in proportion to 
risk. The Level of Evidence (LOE) rates the quality of sci-
entific evidence supporting the intervention on the basis 
of the type, quantity, and consistency of data from clinical 
trials and other sources (Table 3).1
Table 3.  Applying the American College of Cardiology/American Heart Association Class of Recommendation and Level of  
Evidence to Clinical Strategies, Interventions, Treatments, or Diagnostic Testing in Patient Care* (Updated May 2019)
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on November 12, 2025

CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINESCirculation. 2023;148:e9–e119. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000001168 August 29, 2023
Virani et al 2023 AHA/ACC/ACCP/ASPC/NLA/PCNA Chronic Coronary Disease Guideline e171.6. Abbreviations
Abbreviation Meaning/Phrase 
ACE angiotensin-converting enzyme
ACS acute coronary syndrome
AF atrial fibrillation
ARB angiotensin-receptor blocker
ASCVD atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease
BMI body mass index
BP blood pressure
CABG coronary artery bypass grafting
CAD coronary artery disease
CCB calcium channel blocker
CCD chronic coronary disease
CHD coronary heart disease
CKD chronic kidney disease
CMR cardiovascular magnetic resonance
COVID-19 coronavirus disease 2019
CR cardiac rehabilitation
CVD cardiovascular disease
CTA computed tomography angiography
CCTA coronary CT angiography
DAPT dual antiplatelet therapy
DOAC direct oral anticoagulant
ECG electrocardiogram
eGFR estimated glomerular filtration rate
FDA US Food and Drug Administration
FH familial hypercholesterolemia
FFR fractional flow reserve
GDMT guideline-directed management and therapy
GLP-1 glucagon-like peptide-1
HDL high-density lipoprotein
HF heart failure
HIV human immunodeficiency virus
iFR instantaneous wave-free ratio
INOCA ischemia with nonobstructive coronary artery
LDL low-density lipoprotein
LV left ventricular
LVE F left ventricular ejection fraction
MACE major adverse cardiovascular event
MBFR myocardial blood flow reserve
MPI myocardial perfusion imaging
MI myocardial infarction
NRT nicotine replacement therapy
P2Y12 platelet adenosine diphosphate receptor
PET positron emission tomography
PCI percutaneous coronary intervention
PCSK9 proprotein convertase subtilisin/kexin type 9
PPI proton pump inhibitorAbbreviation Meaning/Phrase 
QOL quality of life
RAASi renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system inhibitor
RCT randomized controlled trial
SAPT single antiplatelet therapy
SCAD spontaneous coronary artery dissection
SDOH social determinants of health
S G LT2 sodium glucose cotransporter 2
SPECT single-photon emission computed tomography
TIA transient ischemic attack
2. EPIDEMIOLOGY AND GENERAL 
PRINCIPLES
CCD is a heterogeneous group of conditions that includes 
obstructive and nonobstructive CAD with or without previ-
ous myocardial infarction (MI) or revascularization, isch-
emic heart disease diagnosed only by noninvasive testing, 
and chronic angina syndromes with varying underlying 
causes. Approximately 20.1 million persons in the United 
States live with CCD, 11.1 million Americans have chron-
ic stable angina pectoris, and approximately one-quarter 
(n=200 000) of all MIs in the United States occur among 
the 8.8 million persons with CCD who have had a pre-
vious MI (Table 4).1 Despite an approximate 25% over-
all relative decline in death from coronary heart disease 
(CHD) over the past decade, it remains the leading cause 
of death in the United States and worldwide and is asso-
ciated with substantial individual, economic, and societal 
burdens.1 Within the United States (Figures 1 and 2, Table 
4) and worldwide (Figure 3), the prevalence of CCD and 
chronic stable angina vary by age, sex, race, ethnicity, and 
geographic region, and the role of SDOH in both risk for 
and outcomes from CCD is increasingly recognized.1
Since the publication of the “2012 ACCF/AHA/ACP/
AATS/PCNA/SCAI/STS Guideline for the Diagnosis and 
Management of Patients With Stable Ischemic Heart Dis-
ease,”2 not only have health care expenditures for CCD 
remained high, but also the number and complexity of 
comorbid conditions and concurrent treatments for those 
conditions among patients with CCD have increased. For 
example, older age and chronic kidney disease (CKD) 
commonly coexist with CCD and independently and 
together raise unique considerations for diagnosis, risk 
stratification, and treatment. At the intersection between 
CCD and atrial fibrillation (AF), new information informs 
the use of antiplatelet therapy and anticoagulation in 
patients with CCD and atrial fibrillation. Additionally, as 
the population ages and both CCD and cancer survival 
improve, concurrent CCD and cancer more often coexist, 
and the field of cardio-oncology has emerged to address 
the challenges of these intersecting chronic conditions. 
Further, the fields of diabetes and lipid management have 
evolved rapidly with multiple new therapies (eg, sodium 
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on November 12, 2025

CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINESAugust 29, 2023 Circulation. 2023;148:e9–e119. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000001168
Virani et al 2023 AHA/ACC/ACCP/ASPC/NLA/PCNA Chronic Coronary Disease Guideline e18glucose cotransporter 2 [SGL T2] inhibitors, glucagon-like 
peptide-1 [GLP-1] receptor agonists, proprotein conver-
tase subtilisin/kexin type 9 [PCSK9] inhibitors, bempe-doic acid, and inclisiran) emerging in these areas, and the 
range of diagnostic and interventional procedures avail-
able for use in patients with CCD has expanded. Thus, Table 4. US Heart Disease Prevalence, by Age, Race, Ethnicity, and Sex, 2015 to 2018
Population Group Prevalence, CHD,
2015–2018, Age ≥20 y Prevalence, MI,
2015–2018, Age ≥20 y Prevalence, AP, * 
2015–2018, Age ≥20 y 
Both sexes 20.1 million (7 .2% [95% CI, 6.5–7 .9]) 8.8 million (3.1% [95% CI, 2.7–3.6]) 11 million (4.1%)
Men 11 million (8.3%) 5.8 million (4.3%) 5.3 million (4.2%)
Women 9.1 million (6.2%) 3 million (2.1%) 5.7 million (4.0%)
NH White men 8.7% 4.4% 4.5%
NH White women 6.0% 2.0% 4.0%
NH Black men 6.7% 3.9% 3.3%
NH Black women 7 .2% 2.3% 4.7%
Hispanic men 6.8% 3.7% 3.5%
Hispanic women 6.4% 2.1% 4.3%
NH Asian men 5.0% 2.7% 2.1%
NH Asian women 3.2% 0.7% 2.2%
NH Native American/Alaska Native --- --- ---
CHD includes people who responded “yes” to at least 1 of the questions in “Has a doctor or other health professional ever told you that you had CHD, angina or 
angina pectoris, heart attack, or MI?” Those who answered “no” but were diagnosed with Rose angina are also included (the Rose questionnaire is administered only to 
survey participants >40 y of age). CIs have been added for overall prevalence estimates in key chapters. CIs have not been included in this table for all subcategories 
of prevalence for ease of reading. Source: Prevalence of CHD: unpublished National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute (NHLBI) tabulation using National Health and 
Nutrition Examination Survey and Behavioral Risk Factor Surveillance System data.3,4 Percentages for racial and ethnic groups are age adjusted for Americans ≥20 y of 
age. Age-specific percentages are extrapolated to the 2018 US population estimates. These data, based on self-reports, include people who either answered “yes” to 
the question of ever having angina or angina pectoris or were diagnosed with Rose angina (the Rose questionnaire is administered only to survey participants >40 y of 
age). Percentages for racial and ethnic groups are age adjusted for US adults ≥20 y of age. Estimates from NHANES 2015 to 2018 were applied to 2018 population 
estimates (≥20 y of age). 
*AP is chest pain or discomfort that results from insufficient blood flow to the heart muscle. Stable AP is predictable chest pain on exertion or under mental or emotional 
stress. The incidence estimate is for AP without MI.
AP indicates angina pectoris; CHD, coronary heart disease; CI, confidence interval; MI, myocardial infarction; and NH, non-Hispanic.
Adapted with permission from Tsao CW et al.1 Copyright 2022 American Heart Association, Inc.
Figure 1. US Prevalence of CHD per 100 000, by Age and Sex (NHANES 2015 to 2018).
CHD indicates coronary heart disease. Source: Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, National Center for Health Statistics. National Health 
and Nutrition Examination Survey (NHANES) public use data files. Accessed April 15, 2021. https://www.cdc.gov/nchs/nhanes/. Reprinted with 
permission from Tsao CW et al.1 Copyright 2022 American Heart Association, Inc.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on November 12, 2025

CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINESCirculation. 2023;148:e9–e119. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000001168 August 29, 2023
Virani et al 2023 AHA/ACC/ACCP/ASPC/NLA/PCNA Chronic Coronary Disease Guideline e19this guideline will address established diagnostic, risk 
stratification, and treatment approaches in a contempo-
rary context, new therapies, and the intersection between CCD and other comorbid diseases in a framework that 
recognizes the importance of shared decision-making, 
team-based care, and cost and value.
Figure 2. “Ever Told You Had Angina or CHD?” Age-Adjusted US Prevalence, by State (BRFSS Prevalence and Trends Data, 2019).
BRFSS indicates Behavioral Risk Factor Surveillance System; and CHD, coronary heart disease. Source: BRFSS prevalence and trends data. 
Reprinted with permission from Tsao CW et al.1 Copyright 2022 American Heart Association, Inc. Original figure has been modified to remove 
white space between map and legend.
Figure 3. Global Age-Adjusted Prevalence of CCD per 100 000, by Sex, 2020.
CCD indicates chronic coronary disease. Modified with permission from Tsao CW et al.1 Copyright 2022 American Heart Association, Inc. Source: 
Data courtesy of the Global Burden of Disease Study 2020, Institute for Health Metrics and Evaluation. Used with permission. All rights reserved. 
Copyright © 2021 University of Washington. More information is available on the Global Burden of Disease Study website.5
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on November 12, 2025

CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINESAugust 29, 2023 Circulation. 2023;148:e9–e119. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000001168
Virani et al 2023 AHA/ACC/ACCP/ASPC/NLA/PCNA Chronic Coronary Disease Guideline e203. EVALUATION, DIAGNOSIS, AND RISK 
STRATIFICATION
3.1. Diagnostic Evaluation
Recommendations for Diagnostic Evaluation
Referenced studies that support the recommendations are  
summarized in the Online Data Supplement. 
COR LOE Recommendations 
1 B-NR 1. In patients with CCD and a change in symptoms 
or functional capacity that persists despite GDMT, 
stress positron emission tomography/single photon 
emission CT myocardial perfusion imaging (PET/
SPECT MPI), cardiovascular magnetic resonance 
(CMR) imaging, or stress echocardiography is  
recommended to detect the presence and extent 
of myocardial ischemia, estimate risk of major 
adverse cardiovascular events (MACE), and guide 
therapeutic decision-making.*1–23
1 B-R 2. In patients with CCD and a change in symptoms 
or functional capacity that persists despite 
GDMT, invasive coronary angiography (ICA)  
is recommended for guiding therapeutic  
decision-making with the goal of improving  
anginal symptoms.*24–28
2a B-R 3. In patients with CCD and a change in symptoms 
or functional capacity that persists despite GDMT, 
when selected for rest/stress nuclear MPI, PET is 
reasonable in preference to SPECT, if available, to 
improve diagnostic accuracy and decrease the rate 
of nondiagnostic test results.*29
2a B-NR 4. In patients with CCD and a change in symptoms 
or functional capacity that persists despite GDMT, 
exercise treadmill testing can be useful to  
determine whether the symptoms are consistent 
with angina pectoris, assess the severity of  
symptoms, evaluate functional capacity, and guide 
management.*26,30–32
2a B-NR 5. In patients with CCD undergoing stress PET MPI 
or stress CMR imaging, the addition of myocardial  
blood flow reserve (MBFR) can be useful to 
improve diagnostic accuracy and enhance risk 
stratification.*18–23
2a B-NR 6. In patients with CCD and a change in symptoms  
or functional capacity that persists despite GDMT, 
and who have had previous coronary  
revascularization, coronary CT angiography (CCTA) 
is reasonable to evaluate bypass graft or stent 
patency (for stents ≥3 mm).*33–37
*Modified from the 2021 AHA/ACC/Multisociety Guideline for the Evaluation 
and Diagnosis of Chest Pain.38
Synopsis
In patients with CCD, if there is an opportunity to do so, 
clinicians should first intensify GDMT and defer testing. 
In patients with CCD, assessing the severity of ischemia 
may be useful to guide clinical decision-making regarding 
the use of ICA and for intensification of preventive and 
anti-ischemic therapy. Imaging should be considered in 
those with new-onset or persistent stable chest pain. In 
patients with CCD and frequent angina or severe stress-
induced ischemia, referral to ICA or CCTA is an option.26 
For additional recommendations about known obstructive 
and nonobstructive CAD, suspected ischemia, ischemia with nonobstructive coronary arteries (INOCA), role of 
invasive testing, and revascularization, refer to the 2021 
AHA/ACC chest pain guideline,38 the 2021 ACC/AHA/
SCAI revascularization guideline,39 as well as Section 6.1.2 
(“Ischemia With Nonobstructive Coronary Arteries”) of this 
guideline. Additionally, cost–value considerations for diag-
nostic testing contained within the 2021 AHA/ACC chest 
pain guideline, Section 5.3, should be considered.38
Recommendation-Specific Supportive Text
 1. Observational studies reveal that patients with 
moderate to severe ischemia on PET and SPECT 
MPI have an improved outcome with early coro-
nary revascularization.7 ,21,40–43 Clinical trials of CMR 
imaging that included subgroups of patients with 
obstructive CAD, showed comparable diagnostic 
accuracy to stress SPECT MPI.10,11 Several large, 
multicenter registries revealed that stress CMR 
imaging effectively risk stratifies patients with 
known CAD.14–17 In a multicenter registry of 2496 
patients with a history of CAD, an abnormal stress 
CMR image was associated with a nearly 2-fold 
increased mortality hazard.14 Registry data also 
reported that patients with chest pain syndrome 
with ischemia by MPI and scarring by late gadolin-
ium enhancement had a relative hazard of 1.5 to 2.1 
for cardiovascular death or nonfatal MI.17 Prognosis 
worsens for patients by the extent and severity of 
inducible wall motion abnormalities on stress echo-
cardiography.44,45 Recent randomized trial evidence 
supports the role of stress echocardiography to 
guide clinical decision-making. From the ORBITA 
(Objective Randomized Blinded Investigation With 
Optimal Medical Therapy of Angioplasty in Stable 
Angina) trial, a secondary outcome was a greater 
reduction in the stress echocardiographic wall 
motion score among patients with single-vessel 
CAD treated with percutaneous coronary interven-
tion (PCI) compared with placebo (P<0.0001).46 
Patients with PCI and who have a wall motion 
score ≥1 were more often angina-free compared 
with those in the placebo arm.
 2. Randomized trials of patients with CCD reveal 
a pattern that ischemia-guided PCI results in 
an improvement in angina when compared with 
medical therapy alone.24-26,47 ,48 In the ISCHEMIA 
(International Study of Comparative Health 
Effectiveness with Medical & Invasive Approaches) 
trial, 5179 patients with stable CAD and site-deter-
mined moderate-severe ischemia on stress testing 
(patients with ≥ 50% left main stenosis on CCTA, 
left ventricular ejection fraction [L VEF] <35%, 
and unacceptable angina on medical therapy 
were excluded) were randomized to invasive ver-
sus conservative care strategies.26 No difference 
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on November 12, 2025

CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINESCirculation. 2023;148:e9–e119. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000001168 August 29, 2023
Virani et al 2023 AHA/ACC/ACCP/ASPC/NLA/PCNA Chronic Coronary Disease Guideline e21in the composite primary MACE (cardiovascu-
lar death, MI, hospitalization for unstable angina, 
HF, or resuscitated cardiac arrest) endpoint was 
observed at ∼ 3.3 years of follow-up. Angina 
symptoms improved in both the conservative and 
invasive treatment arms, although improvements 
were larger in the invasive arm, particularly with 
more frequent angina at baseline.48 Therefore, 
in patients with CCD with known anatomy and 
ongoing angina despite GDMT, early invasive 
angiography and revascularization should be con-
sidered to improve symptoms. Notably, secondary 
analyses of RCTs have reported no differences in 
major adverse cardiovascular outcomes in medi-
cal versus invasive medical treatment strategies 
in patient with CCD49 when stratified by ischemia 
severity on noninvasive testing.
 3. The improved diagnostic accuracy of PET MPI is 
helpful in patients with known CAD. In a random-
ized trial of 322 symptomatic patients with known 
CAD, the presence of low- and high-risk stress 
PET findings was associated with lower and 
higher rates of ICA when compared with SPECT 
MPI (P =0.001).29
 4. Observational studies of patients with CAD and 
stable chest pain have shown that exercise tread-
mill testing can be useful by evaluating the rela-
tion of symptoms to graded stress testing, thereby 
helping to confirm the diagnosis of angina pectoris; 
assessing symptom severity; and selecting appro-
priate management (eg, medical therapy, revascu-
larization, cardiac rehabilitation [CR]).26,30–32
 5. Reduced MBFR reflects abnormalities of flow 
within the epicardial coronary arteries, microvas-
culature, or both, and independently predicts risk 
of major CAD events. Measurement of MBFR can 
be effectively accomplished using PET18,50,51 or 
CMR.15 Normal MBFR may be helpful in exclud-
ing high-risk anatomy, although global reduced 
levels (<2) may provide a better estimate of dis-
ease extent and severity. Nonobstructive CAD 
with reduced MBFR is more frequently observed 
in women.50
 6. CCTA is accurate for the assessment of native 
vessel CAD and bypass graft patency with high 
accuracy (∼ 96%) and concordance (82% to 
>93%) to ICA. It may also be useful to assess 
patency of proximal large stents (≥ 3 mm) if such 
information is known at the time of presenta-
tion.33–37 Other modalities may be considered in 
patients with CCD with smaller or more distal 
stents. Several controlled clinical trials have evalu-
ated the concordance of fractional flow reserve 
(FFR)-CT with invasive FFR.52–55 Diagnostic sen-
sitivity of FFR-CT compared with invasive FFR 
is high.3.2. Risk Stratification and Relationship to 
Treatment Selection
Recommendations for Risk Stratification and Relationship to Treatment 
Selection
Referenced studies that support the recommendations are  
summarized in the Online Data Supplement. 
COR LOE Recommendations 
Risk Stratification and Prognosis
1 B-NR 1. In patients with CCD, it is recommended that risk 
stratification incorporate all available information, 
including noninvasive, invasive, or both  
cardiovascular diagnostic testing results or use  
validated risk scores to classify patients as low 
(<1%), intermediate (1%-3%), or high (>3%) yearly 
risk for cardiovascular death or nonfatal MI.1–4
Relationship to Treatment
1 A 2. In patients with CCD, optimization of GDMT is  
recommended to reduce MACE.*5–7
1 A 3. In patients with CCD with newly reduced L V  
systolic function, clinical heart failure, or both, ICA 
is recommended to assess coronary anatomy and 
guide potential revascularization.8,9
3: No 
benefitA 4. In patients with CCD, ICA for risk stratification is 
not routinely recommended in patients without L V 
systolic dysfunction, heart failure, stable chest pain 
refractory to GDMT, and/or noninvasive testing sug-
gestive of significant (>50%) left main disease.5–7,10,11
*Modified from the 2021 AHA/ACC/Multisociety Guideline for the Evaluation 
and Diagnosis of Chest Pain.12
Synopsis
In patients with CCD, the results of noninvasive or inva-
sive testing alone are insufficient to accurately risk stratify 
an individual’s annual future risk of future cardiovascular 
death or nonfatal MI.13 Clinicians should integrate cardio-
vascular test results with demographic, social, and medi-
cal variables (Table 5) and use validated risk prediction 
models (where available) to estimate the annual cardio-
vascular risk. Although multiple randomized trials have 
shown that routine revascularization does not lead to a 
reduction in MACE, a symptom and integrated risk as-
sessment may help identify subsets of patients, such as 
those with persistent angina, reduced L V function or HF, 
who may benefit from routine revascularization.5-8,14
Recommendation-Specific Supportive Test
 1. Noninvasive test results alone are insufficient to 
adequately risk stratify patients with CCD, and the 
additional information improves risk prediction.4 
In an externally validated study of patients who 
underwent an exercise stress testing, the Duke 
Treadmill Score alone had a c-index of 0.62 for all-
cause death, but the addition of clinical variables 
into an integrated risk score improved discrimina-
tion (c-index=0.83) and reclassified 64% of low-
risk Duke Treadmill Score scores to intermediate 
or high risk.1 Externally validated risk scores lack 
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on November 12, 2025

CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINESAugust 29, 2023 Circulation. 2023;148:e9–e119. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000001168
Virani et al 2023 AHA/ACC/ACCP/ASPC/NLA/PCNA Chronic Coronary Disease Guideline e22some functional and anatomic testing modalities, 
but observational studies and secondary analyses 
from randomized trials consistently report that the 
addition of clinical and ancillary imaging variables are associated with improved risk prediction  
(Table 5).3,4,15–44 A meta-analysis of 165 studies 
reported that in patients with a normal functional 
test for CCD, a negative study did not uniformly pre-
dict a <1% annual risk of cardiovascular death or 
nonfatal MI, suggesting that population and patient 
differences may be associated with prognosis.13 
The lone exception is a normal CCTA.45,46 Previous 
AHA/ACC guidelines have recommended stratify-
ing patients with CCD as low (<1% annual risk), 
intermediate (1%-3% annual risk), or high (>3% 
annual risk) risk for MACE.47, 4 8 Although these cut-
offs are somewhat arbitrary and may be grounded 
in historical Bethesda Conference recommenda-
tions based on Duke Treadmill Score risk tertiles, 
we suggest maintaining these categorizations for 
annual cardiovascular death or nonfatal MI.47 ,49,50
 2. The 2021 AHA/ACC chest pain guideline recom-
mends the optimization of anti-ischemic and preven-
tive therapies with the goal to reduce the patient’s 
angina burden and improve clinical outcomes.12 
Three major RCTs including COURAGE (Clinical 
Outcomes Utilizing Revascularization and Aggressive 
Drug Evaluation), ISCHEMIA, and BARI-2D 
(Bypass Angioplasty Revascularization Investigation 
2 Diabetes) have shown that there is no reduction 
in MACE with routine cardiovascular revasculariza-
tion.5–7 The COURAGE trial, which included patients 
with stabilized Canadian Cardiovascular Society 
class IV angina and at least a 70% stenosis in at 
least 1 coronary artery with evidence of ischemia, 
reported no difference in all-cause death or nonfa-
tal MI between revascularization with PCI and opti-
mal medical therapy. The BARI-2D trial randomized 
patients with type 2 diabetes and CCD (≥ 70% ste-
nosis of a major coronary artery and angina or ≥50% 
stenosis of a major coronary artery with a positive 
stress test) to revascularization or medical therapy 
and reported no difference in survival.
 3. The STICH (Surgical Treatment for Ischemic Heart 
Failure) trial randomized 1212 patients with an ejec-
tion fraction ≤ 35% with coronary disease amenable 
to coronary artery bypass grafting (CABG) to either 
medical therapy alone or medical therapy and CABG. 
After a median follow-up of 56 months, no significant 
difference was observed in the primary outcomes of 
all-cause death (41% versus 36%; P =0.12), but 
cardiovascular death (33% versus 28%; P =0.05) 
and all-cause death or cardiovascular hospitaliza-
tion (68% versus 58%; P <0.001) were lower in 
the CABG arm.9 In a secondary analysis of the 
ISCHEMIA trial, 398 participants had HF or an L VEF 
<45%. Both the 4-year primary composite endpoint 
(17 .2% versus 29.3%; event rate difference, −12.1% 
[95% CI, −22.6 to −1.6]) and cardiovascular death 
or MI (14.6% versus 25.9%; event rate difference Table 5. Potential Features Associated With a Higher Risk 
of MACE Among Patients With Established CCD
Demographics and Socioeconomic Status (also see Section 4.1.4, 
“Social Determinants of Health”)
Age
Male sex
Poor social support
Poverty or lack of health care access
Past or Concurrent Medical, Mental Health Conditions
Elevated body mass index
Previous MI, PCI, or CABG
HF
Atrial fibrillation or flutter
Diabetes
Dyslipidemia
Chronic kidney disease
Current or former smoker
Peripheral artery disease
Depression
Poor adherence with goal-directed pharmacotherapy
Ancillary Cardiac Testing or Imaging
Inability to exercise
Angina with stress
ECG: left bundle branch block, left ventricular hypertrophy, higher resting 
heart rate
Echocardiography: reduced left ventricular ejection fraction, left ventricular 
hypertrophy
EST: higher DTS, higher resting heart rate, achieved heart rate  
<85% predicted
Exercise or dobutamine stress echocardiography: higher DTS, lower exercise  
workload, peak rate-pressure product <15 000, coronary flow reserve <2, no 
change or increase in left ventricular end-systolic volume, reduced ejection 
fraction, ischemic electrocardiographic changes with stress
SPECT or PET: Percentage fixed myocardium on SPECT, transient  
ischemic dilation with stress, reduced coronary flow reserve, ischemic  
electrocardiographic changes with stress
Higher calcium score: alone and in addition to functional imaging
CCTA: total plaque burden, high-risk plaque (positive remodeling  
[remodeling index >1.1], low attenuation [mean CT number <30 HU], or 
napkin-ring sign), reduced CT-fractional flow reserve
CMR: reduced left and/or right ventricular ejection fraction, left ventricular 
hypertrophy, scar or infarct, reduced myocardial perfusion reserve,  
myocardial blood flow at stress
Biomarkers
High-sensitivity troponin, B-type natriuretic peptide
CABG indicates coronary artery bypass graft; CCD, chronic coronary disease; 
CCTA, coronary computed tomography angiography; CMR, cardiovascular mag-
netic resonance imaging; CT, computed tomography; DTS, Duke Treadmill Score; 
ECG, electrocardiogram; EST, exercise stress test; HF, heart failure; HU, Houn-
sfield units; MACE, major adverse cardiovascular events; MI, myocardial infarction; 
PCI, percutaneous coronary intervention; PET, positron emission tomography; and 
SPECT, single-photon emission computed tomography.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on November 12, 2025

CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINESCirculation. 2023;148:e9–e119. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000001168 August 29, 2023
Virani et al 2023 AHA/ACC/ACCP/ASPC/NLA/PCNA Chronic Coronary Disease Guideline e23−11.4% [95% CI, −21.4 to −1.4]) were lower in the 
invasive treatment arm.8 The REVIVED-BCIS2 trial 
randomized 700 patients with and L VEF ≤ 35% with 
CCD amenable to PCI to either medical therapy or 
PCI plus medical therapy and reported no differ-
ence all-cause death or health failure hospitalization 
(38.0% versus 37 .2%).51 In addition to revasculariza-
tion, ICA can also help diagnose the cause of HF and 
help direct medical therapies (eg, lipid lowering). We 
acknowledge the data are less robust for patient with 
HF with preserved ejection fraction.9 Noninvasive 
modalities may be appropriate to evaluate for coro-
nary ischemia in some circumstances. Alternatively, 
CCTA may be considered as an initial diagnostic 
strategy in selected patients with suspected non-
ischemic cardiomyopathy.52
 4. Three multicenter trials (COURAGE, BARI 2D, 
ISCHEMIA) showed no improvement in clinical 
endpoints in patients with CCD randomized to rou-
tine revascularization plus GDMT or initial GDMT; 
although 21% to 42% of patients randomized to 
GDMT eventually underwent revascularization.5–7 In a 
secondary analysis of the ISCHEMIA trial, although 
ischemia severity on noninvasive testing was asso-
ciated with all-cause death, no treatment interac-
tion was observed when participants were stratified 
by mild, moderate, or severe ischemia.10 Similarly, in 
a secondary analysis of the COURAGE trial limited 
to the 60% of patients with stress perfusion imaging 
and coronary angiography information available, there 
was no interaction between therapeutic strategy and 
either severity of ischemia or coronary anatomy.11
4. TREATMENT
4.1. General Approach to Treatment Decisions
Recommendations for General Approach to Treatment Decisions
Referenced studies that support the recommendations are  
summarized in the Online Data Supplement. 
COR LOE Recommendations 
1 C-LD 1. In patients with CCD, clinical follow-up at least annually 
is recommended to assess for symptoms,1–12 change 
in functional status, adherence to and adequacy of 
lifestyle and medical interventions,13–15 and monitoring 
for complications of CCD and its treatments.16–18
2b B-NR 2. In patients with CCD, use of a validated  
CCD-specific patient-reported health status 
measure may be reasonable to assess symptoms, 
functional status, and QOL.19–23
Synopsis
The ultimate goals for treatment of CCD are to prolong 
survival and improve QOL. To do this, treatments should 
target a reduction in (1) cardiac death, (2) nonfatal isch-
emic events, (3) progression of atherosclerosis, and (4) 
symptoms and functional limitations of CCD while con-sidering patient preferences, potential complications of 
procedures/medications, and costs to the health care 
system. When engaging patients in shared decision-
making (Section 4.1.3), clinicians should clearly identify 
that some therapies may improve patient’s symptoms 
whereas other therapies may reduce the risk of ischemic 
events. To optimize treatment for each patient, several 
factors should be considered (Figure 4).24,25
First, a global assessment of the risk of the patient is 
needed (Section 3), including both the risk of ischemic 
events and complications of potential treatment options. 
Second, obtaining a careful assessment of symptoms of 
CCD, functional limitations, and QOL is important. Third, 
SDOH (Section 4.1.4) must be considered. Fourth, the 
patient must be educated (Section 4.1.2) so they can 
actively participate in shared decision-making (Section 
4.1.3). Finally, a team-based approach (Section 4.1.1) 
can help patients and clinicians navigate this process.
Recommendation-Specific Supportive Text
 1. Patients with CCD comprise a heterogeneous group 
that includes those with or without angina, a history 
of coronary revascularization, and previous ACS. The 
goals of routine clinical follow-up in these patients 
include: (a) to assess for new or worsened symptoms, 
change in functional status, or decline in QOL; (b) to 
assess for adherence to and adequacy of recom-
mended lifestyle and medical interventions, includ-
ing physical activity, nutrition, weight management, 
stress reduction, smoking cessation, immunization 
status, blood pressure (BP) and glycemic control, 
and antianginal, antithrombotic, and lipid-lowering 
therapies13–15; and (c) to monitor for complications 
of disease or adverse effects related to therapy.16,17 
Although there are insufficient data on which to 
base a definitive recommendation regarding fre-
quency, clinical follow-up evaluation at least annually 
is recommended and may be sufficient if the patient 
is stable on optimized GDMT and reliable enough to 
seek care with a change in symptoms or functional 
capacity. For select individuals, an annual in-person 
evaluation may be supplemented with telehealth vis-
its when clinically appropriate.26 Implementation of 
remote, algorithmically driven-disease management 
programs may provide a useful adjunctive strategy 
to achieve GDMT optimization in eligible patients.27
 2. Revascularization1-3,12 and antianginal medica-
tions4–7 primarily reduce the symptoms of CCD. 
The factor most strongly associated with improve-
ment in symptoms and QOL after revascularization 
is the burden of ischemic symptoms before inter-
vention.8-12,28–30 Thus, assessment of symptoms 
at each clinic visit is important to identify times 
when additional interventions could be useful, as 
well as to quantify the symptomatic response to 
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on November 12, 2025

CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINESAugust 29, 2023 Circulation. 2023;148:e9–e119. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000001168
Virani et al 2023 AHA/ACC/ACCP/ASPC/NLA/PCNA Chronic Coronary Disease Guideline e24interventions. Observational studies suggest that 
clinicians may inaccurately estimate the burden of 
ischemic symptoms,19–21 which can lead to under-22  
or overtreatment.21 Validated patient-reported dis-
ease-specific health status measures (eg, 7-item 
Seattle Angina Questionnaire31) may help to reli-
ably quantify the burden of CCD symptoms and 
reduce variation in assessment among clinicians.23 
Furthermore, patient-reported disease-specific 
health status instruments also measure how the 
patient’s angina affects their QOL, which should 
be an important component of the treatment deci-
sion process. Although several studies showed 
deficiencies with clinician estimation of patient’s 
symptoms, no studies show an improvement in 
quality of care or outcomes with routine use of 
patient-reported measures in clinical care.
4.1.1. Team-Based Approach
Recommendation for Team-Based Approach
Referenced studies that support the recommendation are  
summarized in the Online Data Supplement. 
COR LOE Recommendation 
1 A 1. In patients with CCD, a multidisciplinary team-
based approach is recommended to improve health 
outcomes, facilitate modification of ASCVD risk 
factors, and improve health service utilization.*1–13
*Modified from the 2019 ACC/AHA Guideline on the Primary Prevention of 
Cardiovascular Disease.14Synopsis
A patient-centered, team-based approach that focuses 
on shared decision-making is essential to monitoring and 
managing patients’ CCD symptoms throughout their dis-
ease course. These recommendations apply to all aspects 
of clinical practice for long-term management of CCD. A 
team-based approach can effectively be applied to nearly 
all aspects of CCD management and care. Continuous 
communication among the care team, the patient, and any 
caregivers is essential to optimize outcomes and meet 
patient needs. Figure 5 reflects the interconnectedness 
of the patient and caregiver to the care team and the care 
team members to each other. Components of the health 
care team include but are not limited to: physicians; nurse 
practitioners; physician assistants; nurses and nursing as-
sistants; pharmacists; dietitians; exercise physiologists; 
physical, occupational, and speech therapists; psycholo-
gists; and social workers.
Recommendation-Specific Supportive Text
 1. RCTs and systematic reviews with meta-anal-
ysis show that a patient-centered, multidis-
ciplinary, team-based approach can improve 
patient self-efficacy, health-related QOL, and 
ASCVD risk factor management compared 
with usual care in patients with CCD who also 
Figure 4. Domains to Consider When Seeing a Patient With CCD.
CCD indicates chronic coronary disease; CV, cardiovascular; QOL, quality of life; and SDOH, social determinants of health.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on November 12, 2025

CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINESCirculation. 2023;148:e9–e119. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000001168 August 29, 2023
Virani et al 2023 AHA/ACC/ACCP/ASPC/NLA/PCNA Chronic Coronary Disease Guideline e25may have hypertension, diabetes, or hyperlipid-
emia.1-8,11-13,15–34 Patients actively involved in their 
care with the medical team tend to have greater 
knowledge and confidence in self-management, 
which improves health-related QOL.1,21,32 Team-
based care also facilitates behavior change and 
promotes weight loss, tobacco cessation, and 
reduces depression.8,12,16,31,33,35 A team-based 
approach may be more cost-effective and cost-
efficient compared with usual care and reduces 
emergency department visits, unplanned health 
service utilization, cardiovascular complica-
tions in patients with diabetes, and readmission 
costs.6,7 ,9,10,20-22,27 ,28,31,32,34 A large cohort study com-
paring health care resource utilization of >1 mil-
lion patients with either diabetes or ASCVD found 
that, overall, health care resource utilization was 
comparable among patients receiving care from 
physicians compared with advanced practice 
providers, although physicians work with larger 
patient panels.9 Communication through tele-
health, patient education sessions, specialty clin-
ics, medication therapy management, and patient 
decision support aids are appropriate and useful 
methods for providing patient care.36 Refer to 
Sections 4.1, 4.2, 4.3, and 7 for management.4.1.2. Patient Education
Recommendations for Patient Education
Referenced studies that support the recommendations are  
summarized in Online Data Supplement. 
COR LOE Recommendations 
1 C-LD 1. Patients with CCD should receive ongoing  
individualized education on symptom management,  
lifestyle changes, and SDOH risk factors to 
improve knowledge and facilitate behavior change.1
1 C-LD 2. Patients with CCD should receive ongoing  
individualized education on medication adherence to 
improve knowledge and facilitate behavior change.2–4
Synopsis
Patient education is defined as “the process by which 
health professionals and others impart information to 
patients that will alter their health behaviors or improve 
their health status.’’1,5 Systematic reviews of studies us-
ing educational interventions suggest they improve pa-
tient knowledge and facilitate behavior change,1 although 
impact on sustained lifestyle change, cholesterol and BP 
levels, and morbidity and mortality rates are less clear.5–7 
A meta-analysis of secondary prevention programs sug-
gested education and counseling after MI reduced mor-
tality but not recurrent MI.6 In contrast, a review of RCTs 
on educational interventions among patients with various  
Figure 5. Team-Based Approach 
Reflective of Interconnectedness and 
Communication.
RN indicates registered nurse.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on November 12, 2025

CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINESAugust 29, 2023 Circulation. 2023;148:e9–e119. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000001168
Virani et al 2023 AHA/ACC/ACCP/ASPC/NLA/PCNA Chronic Coronary Disease Guideline e26manifestations of coronary disease concluded that edu-
cation had no effect on total mortality, recurrent MI, or 
hospitalizations.5 Y et, Swedish registry data suggest that 
the education component of CR is strongly linked to  
cardiovascular and total mortality.7 Published studies of 
educational interventions for patients with CCD, whether 
provided in person or by Internet, are heterogeneous, often  
incompletely described, many are short-term, and out-
comes assessment varies. At this time, there are insuffi-
cient comparative data to provide clinicians and their care 
teams assistance when choosing among interventions, a 
gap that should be addressed in future research studies.
Recommendation-Specific Supportive Text
 1. A systematic review of the effect of patient edu-
cation reported improvement in knowledge about 
medications and appropriate responses to symp-
toms,1 as well as improvements in physical activity, 
dietary habits, and smoking cessation rates, but no 
convincing evidence of improvement in response to 
cardiac symptoms or psychosocial well-being was 
observed.1 A review of 7 RCTs of Internet-based 
education and support found there was some sup-
portive evidence for these interventions, but the 
overall effectiveness could not be determined.8 
Education should be tailored to individual patients 
and their caregivers, reinforced at regular inter-
vals, and modified as the patient’s circumstances 
change. Health literacy is defined as “the degree 
to which individuals have the capacity to obtain, 
process, and understand basic health information 
and services needed to make appropriate health 
decisions.”9 Verbal and written communications 
should be designed at the appropriate reading 
level, preferably in a patient’s native language, and 
culturally and contextually appropriate. The Agency 
for Healthcare Research and Quality has created 
a toolkit with detailed guidance on improving writ-
ten and spoken communication, self-management 
and empowerment, and improving supportive sys-
tems.10 Internet-based self-management programs 
to improve access to ongoing support have been 
developed, but data on their efficacy are limited.8
 2. Of the 68 trials and 20 intervention approaches in 
an Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality 
comparative effectiveness analysis, only 1 trial 
enrolled patients with CCD (those with recent MI).4 
In that trial, patients in the treatment arm had 1.3 
extra days of medication coverage per month over 
9 months of follow-up and were 17% more likely to 
have >80% adherence compared with patients in 
the control arm. No significant difference in persis-
tence of medication use was observed.11 Another 
systematic review found no convincing evidence of 
improved medication adherence with educational interventions.1 A 2020 systematic review of phar-
macist-based patient education for patients on 
cardiovascular medications (only some with CCD) 
concluded that the interventions improved medi-
cation adherence but not necessarily clinical out-
comes.2 Another systematic review with the goal of 
comparing outcomes of different types of educa-
tional interventions targeting medication adherence 
found interventions delivered by pharmacists and 
nurses had the most favorable outcomes, although 
results were very heterogeneous.12 A recent RCT 
of a pharmacist-administered intervention that used 
motivational interviewing to improve medication 
adherence among CCD patients improved medi-
cation adherence but had no effect on low-density 
lipoprotein cholesterol (LDL-C) levels, systolic BP, 
unplanned health care contact, or physical or emo-
tional scores of the Heart Quality of Life Instrument.3
4.1.3. Shared Decision-Making
Recommendations for Shared Decision-Making
Referenced studies that support the recommendations are  
summarized in the Online Data Supplement. 
COR LOE Recommendations 
1 C-LD 1. Patients with CCD and their clinicians should 
engage in shared decision-making particularly 
when evidence is unclear on the optimal diagnostic 
or treatment strategy, or when a significant risk or 
benefit tradeoff exists.1–3
2b B-R 2. For patients with CCD and angina on GDMT who 
are engaged in shared decision-making regarding 
revascularization, a validated decision aid may be 
considered to improve patient understanding and 
knowledge about treatment options.4
Synopsis
Shared decision-making is a collaborative decision-
making process that includes patient education about 
risks, benefits, alternatives to treatment and testing 
options, and clinician ascertainment of patient values 
and goals. Shared decision-making helps to maximize 
patient engagement in medical decision-making, in-
crease patient knowledge about their care, and align 
treatment decisions with patient preferences. Even 
when evidence suggests one treatment or testing mo-
dality compared with another may lead to improved car-
diovascular outcomes at a population level, the optimal 
treatment or testing choice for an individual patient may 
vary based on patient values and preferences, as well 
as the financial implications of the choice to the pa-
tient. Decision aids can improve knowledge and reduce 
decisional conflict in shared decision-making, but few 
validated decision aids are available for patients with 
CCD. Clinician-patient conversations, as well as cor-
responding educational materials, should be tailored to 
the patient’s preferred language, reading level, health 
literacy, and visual acuity.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on November 12, 2025

CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINESCirculation. 2023;148:e9–e119. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000001168 August 29, 2023
Virani et al 2023 AHA/ACC/ACCP/ASPC/NLA/PCNA Chronic Coronary Disease Guideline e27Recommendation-Specific Supportive Text
 1. Most patients prefer to have an active role in 
their treatment decisions.1-3,5 The right to infor-
mation includes patients without decision-making 
capacity or who have chosen to defer treatment 
decisions to a designated caregiver. In shared 
decision-making, clinicians inform patients of the 
availability, risks, benefits, and alternatives of all 
medically appropriate testing or treatment options 
(which may include no testing or treatment), con-
firm patient understanding, assess patient values 
and treatment goals, and collaborate with patients 
to decide about their care. Patients may choose to 
include others in the shared decision-making pro-
cess. Patient choices can include a treatment or 
therapeutic decision, an active choice to defer the 
decision, or a delegation of that decision to their 
care team or other designated individual. Patients 
and clinicians should engage in shared decision-
making particularly when multiple medically appro-
priate options are available, when treatments or 
testing options confer increased risks, or when 
evidence is unclear on the optimal treatment strat-
egy or when a risk:benefit tradeoff exists between 
different options. In patients with CCD, example 
areas for shared decision-making include dura-
tion, dose, and choice of antithrombotic therapy 
for secondary prevention and revascularization or 
medical therapy for stable angina.
 2. Decision aids can increase patient knowledge, 
accuracy of risk perception, and agreement 
between patient values and care choices made, 
and may reduce decisional conflict for patients, 
but aids have not been developed and validated 
for many decisions made by patients with CCD.6 
Before implementation of any decision aid, the 
decision aid should be developed according to 
best practice and validated in the target popu-
lation.7–9 Decision aids should augment, not 
replace, conversations between clinicians and 
patients. The decision aid PCI Choice was shown 
to increase knowledge about therapy options 
among patients with CCD choosing between opti-
mal medical therapy alone or with PCI.4
4.1.4. Social Determinants of Health
Recommendation for SDOH
Referenced studies that support the recommendation are summa-
rized in the Online Data Supplement. 
COR LOE Recommendation 
1 B-R 1. In patients with CCD, routine assessment by 
clinicians and the care team for SDOH is recom-
mended to inform patient-centered treatment deci-
sions and lifestyle change recommendations.*1–8
*Modified from the 2019 ACC/AHA Guideline on the Primary Prevention of 
Cardiovascular Disease.9Synopsis
SDOH, such as health care access, economic stability, and 
social context are key drivers of persistent health dispari-
ties and health inequities.1,10–13 SDOH have profound influ-
ences on the health and well-being of patients with CCD 
and have become increasingly recognized in cardiovascular 
medicine.2,9,10,14–18 There is an intersection of SDOH with 
sex, socioeconomic class, race, ethnicity, sexual orientation, 
and social vulnerabilities.12,19–21 SDOH impact all stages of 
CCD management, including secondary prevention, treat-
ment, access to care, and patient follow-up (Section 7 .1, 
“Follow-Up Plan and Testing”) and self-management.14 Cli-
nicians should ensure health equity in cardiovascular care 
by viewing each patient through an SDOH lens with cultur-
al humility to formulate comprehensive care plans (Figure 
6). Brief, evidence-based screening tools are available to 
support clinicians in identifying SDOH that may negatively 
affect health outcomes and health care utilization.4,13,22–24 
Routine SDOH screening in patients with CCD by clini-
cians or front-line staff should encompass assessment 
of mental health (Section 4.2.2), psychosocial stressors, 
health literacy, sociocultural influences (language, religious 
affiliation, body image), financial strain, transportation, in-
surance status, barriers to adherence to a heart healthy 
diet (food security) (Section 4.2.1, “Nutrition, Including 
Supplements”), neighborhood or environmental exposures 
(Section 4.2.11), and viable options for regular physi-
cal activity (Section 4.2.10, “Cardiac Rehabilitation”) and 
social support.1,2,25 Based on identified barriers or needs, 
collaborative cardiovascular care teams can provide tan-
gible and practical community-based resources and ser-
vices to patients.2,26–28 Operationalization of guidelines on 
addressing SDOH requires embedding health equity into 
clinical practice, team-based care, patient education, and 
shared decision-making tools (Sections 4.1.1, 4.1.2, and 
4.1.3).13,14,17 ,19,29–33
Recommendation-Specific Supportive Text
 1. Integration of SDOH is based on evidence show-
ing the effect of SDOH on long-term cardiovascu-
lar outcomes.9,10 Patients experiencing an MI at a 
young age had higher neighborhood disadvantage 
that was associated with 57% higher cardiovascu-
lar mortality after an 11-year period.34 Women in the 
lower-income bracket were more likely to be under- 
or uninsured and had higher medication costs and 
higher 5-year rehospitalization rates compared 
with higher-income women.35 Lower education and 
income levels were associated with lower prescrib-
ing of GDMT, as well as outcomes post-MI.2,36–39 
Further, there are disparities in CR (Section 4.2.10) 
referral and completion among racial and ethnic 
minorities, women, according to socioeconomic sta-
tus, and across those living in rural and dense urban 
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on November 12, 2025

CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINESAugust 29, 2023 Circulation. 2023;148:e9–e119. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000001168
Virani et al 2023 AHA/ACC/ACCP/ASPC/NLA/PCNA Chronic Coronary Disease Guideline e28
Figure 6. Social Determinants of Health and Cardiovascular Care for Patients With CCD.
• Identifies SDOH issue. ✓ Considerations for clinicians and care teams. CCD indicates chronic coronary disease, and SDOH, social determinants 
of health. Adapted with permission from Lindley KJ et al.3 Copyright 2021 American College of Cardiology Foundation.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on November 12, 2025

CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINESCirculation. 2023;148:e9–e119. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000001168 August 29, 2023
Virani et al 2023 AHA/ACC/ACCP/ASPC/NLA/PCNA Chronic Coronary Disease Guideline e29areas.2,40–42 Neighborhood environment influences 
healthy lifestyle promotion and maintenance, man-
agement of traditional and nontraditional cardio-
vascular risk factors, and outcomes.43–48 Telehealth 
and digital interventions are promising strategies to 
improve access to health care, management and 
health behaviors; however, consideration of SDOH 
influences is warranted.3,29,49–51 Empirical evidence 
supports the use of screening tools in patients 
with multiple chronic diseases to efficiently assess 
SDOH in the clinical setting, facilitate tailoring of 
individualized care plans, and improve quality of 
care and outcomes.4,22,30,31,52–54 Collaborative part-
nerships between health care systems and com-
munity-based organizations can assist clinicians, 
patients, and their families in meeting unmet social 
needs as an extension of standard cardiovascular 
care for health equity.3,55
4.2. Guideline-Directed Management and 
Therapy
4.2.1. Nutrition, Including Supplements
Recommendations for Nutrition, Including Supplements
Referenced studies that support the recommendations are  
summarized in Online Data Supplement. 
Recommendations 
COR LOE Nutrition 
1 B-R 1. In patients with CCD, a diet emphasizing  
vegetables, fruits, legumes, nuts, whole grains, and 
lean protein is recommended to reduce the risk of 
CVD events.*1–4
2a B-NR 2. In patients with CCD, reducing the percentage of 
calories from saturated fat (<6% of total calories) 
and replacing with dietary monounsaturated and 
polyunsaturated fat, complex carbohydrates, and 
dietary fiber can be beneficial to reduce the risk of 
CVD events.*1–6
2a B-NR 3. In patients with CCD, minimization of sodium 
(<2300 mg/d; optimally 1500 mg/d) and minimi-
zation of processed meats (eg, cured bacon, hot 
dogs) can be beneficial to reduce the risk of CVD 
events.*2,3,6,7
2a B-NR 4. In patients with CCD, limiting refined carbohy-
drates (eg, containing <25% whole grain by 
weight, including refined cold ready-to-eat break-
fast cereal, white bread, white rice), and sugar-
sweetened beverages (eg, soft drinks, energy 
drinks, fruit drinks with added sugars) can be 
beneficial to reduce the risk of CVD events.*2–4,6,8
3: Harm B-NR 5. In patients with CCD, the intake of trans fat should 
be avoided because trans fat is associated with 
increased morbidity and mortality rates.*9,10
Nutrition Supplements
3: No 
BenefitB-NR 6. In patients with CCD, the use of nonprescription 
or dietary supplements, including omega-3 fatty 
acid, vitamins C, D, E, beta-carotene, and calcium, 
is not beneficial to reduce the risk of acute CVD 
events.11–22
*Modified from the 2019 ACC/AHA Guideline on the Primary Prevention of 
Cardiovascular Disease.23Synopsis
Among patients with CCD, dietary behavior changes along 
with GDMT are important to reduce the risk of acute 
CVD events including ASCVD, and outcomes related to 
HF, stroke, and CVD-related deaths.1,2,24 Among patients 
with CCD, it is well established that healthy dietary choic-
es improve management of CVD risk factors and target 
pathophysiologic mechanisms contributing to acute CVD 
events.25,26 Studies across diverse populations support 
the health benefits of a higher intake of whole grains and 
fiber, with lower intake of saturated fat, sodium, refined 
carbohydrates, and sweetened beverages23,27 ,28 (Figure 7). 
Healthy dietary choices combined with caloric reduction 
will support weight loss goals and improve cardiometabolic 
health for overweight and obese patients.29,30 In contrast, 
nonprescription nutrition or dietary supplements28 have in-
sufficient evidence to support their use to reduce the risk 
of acute CVD events in patients with CCD.18,31 For this 
guideline, nutrition supplements is defined by the National 
Institutes of Health – Office of Dietary Supplements as 
nonprescription, dietary supplements that contain minerals 
(eg, calcium), herbs, amino acids, and vitamins across all 
dosage forms (eg, tablets, gummies).32
Recommendation-Specific Supportive Text
 1. Mediterranean-type dietary plans with higher 
intake of healthy plant-based foods and lean 
protein (eg, fish), with lower quantities of satu-
rated fat (eg, red meat) help reduce cardiovas-
cular risk factors, including insulin resistance, 
diabetes, dyslipidemia, hypertension, and obe-
sity.1,2,30,33–35 Multiple secondary CVD preven-
tion studies showed lower risk of subsequent 
CVD events and total mortality rate with higher 
intake of healthy plant-based diets, including 
Mediterranean diets.1-3,33 The Lyon Diet Heart 
Study randomized participants hospitalized with 
their first MI to a Mediterranean diet interven-
tion or usual care.2 After a mean intervention 
follow-up of 44.9 months, the Mediterranean 
diet showed up to a 65% reduction in composite 
CVD outcomes (cardiac death and nonfatal MI).2 
Additionally, multiple prospective cohorts showed 
an inverse relationship between lower all-cause 
death, greater adherence across multiple com-
ponents of the Mediterranean diet (including 
fish),36 and higher intake of healthier plant-
based options.37 Specific dietary components 
and serving sizes have varied across studies1; 
the AHA has previously published recommenda-
tions according to energy needs and weight loss 
goals.30 However, additional research is needed 
on mechanisms associated with Mediterranean-
diet patterns, CVD death, and all-cause death.1
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on November 12, 2025

CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINESAugust 29, 2023 Circulation. 2023;148:e9–e119. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000001168
Virani et al 2023 AHA/ACC/ACCP/ASPC/NLA/PCNA Chronic Coronary Disease Guideline e30 2. Implementation of healthy plant-based and 
Mediterranean-based diets includes reduc-
ing saturated fat and optimizing caloric intake 
to include higher intake of monounsaturated 
fats, polyunsaturated fats, and complex carbo-
hydrates.2,34,35,38 Higher dietary fiber intake is 
associated with improvement in CVD risk factors, 
including lower BP, improved insulin sensitivity, 
and support of weight loss goals,3,5 in addition to 
a lower risk of CVD events and all-cause death 
in patients with CCD.3 A meta-analysis of pro-
spective cohorts and randomized clinical trials 
supports a dose-response relationship of higher 
quality carbohydrate intake and lower CVD-
related morbidity and mortality rates.5,39 For 
patients at higher CVD risk, the AHA recom-
mends lowering saturated fatty acids to <6% 
of total caloric intake.30 Reduction in saturated 
fatty acids, with healthier fat and carbohydrate 
intake, lowers LDL-C, which is associated with 
lower CVD morbidity and mortality rates.3,30,38–40  
A recent Cochrane review of randomized trials 
that reduced saturated fat intake, altered dietary 
fats, or both highlighted a 17% reduction of CVD 
events in patients with CCD.6 Among secondary 
prevention trials, the number needed to treat for 
an additional benefit was 53, by lowering satu-
rated fat >4 years.6,29
 3. Dietary sodium reduction to <2300 mg/d (optimal 
target of 1500 mg/d) is important to lower BP.8,41 
Sodium reduction with a healthy diet reduces the 
risk of future CVD events, even in patients with 
CCD.3,7 Recent analysis of the DASH (Dietary 
Approaches to Stop Hypertension)-Sodium study 
showed that sodium reduction may improve bio-
markers of cardiac injury, inflammation, and cardiac 
strain.42 Dietary education should highlight poten-
tial sources of dietary sodium, including processed 
meat, which is a significant contributor to dietary 
sodium in the United States.43,44 According to the 
AHA, processed meats include smoked, cured, salted meats, and/or meats with chemical preser-
vatives.23 Although the DASH diet supports higher 
potassium intake,8 insufficient data are available in 
populations with CCD to provide specific potas-
sium recommendations.
 4. The consumption of simple carbohydrates (eg, 
high-fructose corn syrup) and refined grains (eg, 
containing <25% whole grain by weight, including 
some refined cold ready-to-eat breakfast cereal, 
white bread, white rice)4 has adverse effects on 
lipoproteins, including LDL-C, apolipoprotein B, 
and plasma triglycerides.6,38 Minimizing intake of 
simple carbohydrates and refined grains supports 
a healthier cardiometabolic profile.4,6,39 Sugar-
sweetened beverages are defined by the AHA 
as “manufactured carbonated and noncarbonated 
beverages containing caloric sweeteners or syrups 
and include caloric soft drinks (ie, not sugar-free), 
fruit drinks, sports and energy drinks, sweetened 
waters, and tea and coffee beverages with added 
sugars.”45 Sugar-sweetened beverage consumption 
is associated with an increased risk of CVD events, 
including in patients with CCD,3 and associated 
with chronic conditions including diabetes, CKD, 
and obesity.23,46 Overall, multiple healthy dietary 
components, including reduction in dietary sodium, 
sugar-sweetened beverages, and saturated fat 
reduces all-cause death among secondary preven-
tion cohorts.3 Recommendations are unavailable 
for artificial sweeteners because of limited data in 
populations with CCD.
 5. Consumption of trans fat has been associated with 
an increased risk of CVD events, including CVD 
mortality rate, and all-cause death in primary pre-
vention populations and among individuals with 
CCD.9,10,23,47 This association has been primarily 
attributed to industrially processed hydrogenated 
vegetable oils (eg, baked goods, fried foods), 
and less from ruminant trans fats (eg, meat and 
milk from ruminant animals, including cattle and 
sheep),40,47 resulting in a higher risk of CHD.9,10,23,47
Figure 7. Recommended Nutrition.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on November 12, 2025

CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINESCirculation. 2023;148:e9–e119. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000001168 August 29, 2023
Virani et al 2023 AHA/ACC/ACCP/ASPC/NLA/PCNA Chronic Coronary Disease Guideline e31 6. In patients at high risk for CCD, nonprescription 
dietary omega-3 fatty acid supplements (eg, cap-
sules, oil, soft gels) do not reduce CVD events 
or all-cause death12,13; a Cochrane meta-analysis 
including 86 RCTs showed “little or no effect.”11 
See Section 4.2.6 (“Lipid Management”) on the 
role of prescription icosapent ethyl (highly puri-
fied eicosapentaenoic acid ethyl ester).48 Despite 
observational studies,49,50 insufficient evidence is 
available that shows vitamin D supplementation 
reduces CVD events.14,15,51 In a meta-analysis of 
21 RCTs (vitamin D [n=41 669] versus placebo 
[n=41 662]), vitamin D supplementation did not 
lower the risk of MACE.15 Additionally, antioxidant 
therapy is not associated with a decreased risk of 
CVD events.17 ,19,22,31 Vitamin C, beta-carotene, mul-
tivitamins, or all of them do not decrease CVD event 
risk19 or CVD mortality rate.52 Insufficient data are 
available to support calcium supplementation (ele-
mental calcium supplement ≥500 mg/d; carbon-
ate, citrate, or gluconate formulation) in patients 
with CCD for CVD event reduction.21 A meta-
analysis of double-blind RCTs (n=14 692 [cal-
cium supplement intervention] versus n=14 243 
[placebo-controlled]) showed an increased risk of 
CVD and CHD events with calcium supplemen-
tation.21 Mixed results on dietary calcium supple-
mentation and CVD events suggests a U-shaped 
dose-response pattern.20,21
4.2.2. Mental Health Conditions
Recommendations for Mental Health Conditions
Referenced studies that support the recommendations are  
summarized in the Online Data Supplement. 
COR LOE Recommendations 
2a B-R 1. In patients with CCD, targeted discussions and 
screening for mental health is reasonable for clini-
cians to assess and to refer for additional mental 
health evaluation and management.1–4
2a B-R 2. In patients with CCD, treatment for mental health 
conditions with either pharmacologic or nonphar-
macologic therapies, or both, is reasonable to 
improve cardiovascular outcomes.2,4–6Synopsis
Mental health has a major role in overall cardiovascu-
lar health and well-being in patients with CCD.7 Mental 
health is defined as “a state of well-being in which an 
individual realizes his or her own abilities, can cope with 
the normal stresses of life, can work productively and is 
able to make a contribution to his or her community.”8 
Mental health can have positive or negative effects on 
cardiovascular risk factors and outcomes.7, 9 It is estimat-
ed that 20% to 40% of patients with CCD have con-
comitant mental health conditions such as depression 
and anxiety.10,11 Meta-analyses have shown that negative 
psychological states (eg, general distress) are associ-
ated with MACE in men and women with CCD.12 Despite 
being a modifiable prognostic risk factor for CCD out-
comes, screening for mental health disorders is seldom 
addressed in the clinical setting.4,13 Potentially underpin-
ning the bidirectional relationship between mental health 
and CCD is the resulting influence on health behaviors 
(eg, medication and CR adherence, diet, physical activ-
ity, sleep, smoking) and risk factors (eg, BP, lipids, body 
mass index [BMI], inflammation, thrombosis).4,7 Pharma-
cologic and psychotherapeutic treatments may reduce 
recurrent cardiovascular events and mortality rate in pa-
tients with CCD.5,14–17 See Section 4.1.4 for discussion of 
the interplay between mental health and SDOH.
Recommendation-Specific Supportive Text
 1. Mental health factors, including depression, anxi-
ety, anger or hostility, general distress and type 
D personality (where D stands for “distressed”), 
are common in diverse populations with CCD.12 
Psychological stress from environmental sources 
(eg, financial hardships, social isolation, discrimi-
nation) can have deleterious effects.7 ,18–22 Studies 
consistently show that comorbid depression, anxi-
ety, or emotional distress in patients with CCD is 
associated with diminished QOL,23 atherosclerotic 
disease progression,24 and negative effects on 
cardiovascular risk factors, leading to poorer car-
diovascular outcomes.6,7 ,25–30 An assessment of 
the use of depression screening found that among 
patients with recent ACS, screening positive for 
depression was associated with a 2-fold increase in 
MACE (adjusted hazard ratio, 2.15 [95% CI, 1.63-
2.83]).2 Patients randomized to antidepressants 
had significantly lower all-cause death than those 
not receiving treatment.2 However, the CODIACS-
QoL (Comparison of Depression Interventions After 
Acute Coronary Syndrome: Quality of Life) trial of 
patients after ACS showed no benefit of systematic 
depression screening (with or without subsequent 
treatment) on QOL or mortality.2,3 Short, well-vali-
dated screening tools for depression or anxiety Table 6. Suggested Screening Tool to Assess Psychological 
Distress: Patient Health Questionnaire-2 Depression Screen
Over the past 2 weeks, how 
often have you been bothered 
by the following problems? Not at 
all Several 
days More 
than half 
the days Nearly 
every 
day 
Little interest or pleasure  
in doing things0 1 2 3
Feeling down, depressed, or 
hopeless0 1 2 3
Total score of ≥3 warrants further assessment for depression.
Data derived from Kroenke et al.31 and Levine et al.7, 4 6 Reprinted with permis-
sion from Levine GN et al. Copyright 2021 American Heart Association, Inc.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on November 12, 2025

CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINESAugust 29, 2023 Circulation. 2023;148:e9–e119. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000001168
Virani et al 2023 AHA/ACC/ACCP/ASPC/NLA/PCNA Chronic Coronary Disease Guideline e32(eg, Patient Health Questionnaire-2, Generalized 
Anxiety Disorder Questionnaire-2) or brief ques-
tions on psychological health (eg, positive affect) 
are available for use in clinical settings (Tables 7 
and 8).7 ,31,32 It is reasonable to refer patients with 
positive screening for in-depth assessment by qual-
ified mental health professionals or to accessible 
resources to promote mental health care.33
 2. Despite the preponderance of data show-
ing the association of depression with adverse cardiovascular outcomes, treatment with antide-
pressants (14%) and psychotherapies (<10%) is 
low in patients after MI.34 Studies including patients 
after ACS with depression found no definitive ben-
efit of antidepressants on long-term cardiovascu-
lar outcomes.15,17 ,35–37 However, the EsDEPACS 
(Escitalopram in Depressive Patients with Acute 
Coronary Artery Syndrome) study showed lower 
MACE after a median 8.1 years follow-up in patients 
with recent ACS treated with escitalopram com-
pared with placebo (40.9% versus 53.6%; hazard 
ratio, 0.69 [95% CI, 0.49-0.96]).5 The TRIUMPH 
(Lifestyle Interventions in Treatment-Resistant 
Hypertension) trial found a higher 1-year mortal-
ity rate among patients with untreated depression 
compared with patients with treated depression 
(rates similar to those without depression).6 In a 
recent systematic review and meta-analysis, com-
bination pharmacologic and psychotherapy, exer-
cise, and antidepressants improved depressive 
symptoms among patients with CCD but had no 
mortality benefit.38 CR (Section 4.2.10) improves 
depression, cardiovascular outcomes, and mortality Table 7. Suggested Screening Questions to Assess  
Psychological Health
Well-being parameter Question 
Health-related optimism How do you think things will go with your health 
moving forward?
Positive affect How often do you experience pleasure or  
happiness in your life?
Gratitude Do you ever feel grateful about your health? 
Do you ever feel grateful about other things in 
your life?
Data derived from Levine GN et al.7, 4 6 Reprinted with permission from Levine 
GN et al. Copyright 2021 American Heart Association, Inc.
Table 8. Behavioral Resources for Smoking Cessation
Resource Description 
Telephone-based: Quitline
English: 1-800-QUIT-NOW (1-800-784-8669)
Spanish: 1-855-DÉJELO-YA (1-855-335-3569)
Mandarin and Cantonese: 1-800-838-8917
Korean: 1-800-556-5564
Vietnamese: 1-800-778-8440Counseling by telephone from a trained tobacco coach who offers support via a series of scheduled  
telephone calls before and after a smoker’s quit date.
Patients can self-refer to the Quitline, or clinicians can refer patients, with their consent, proactively.
Quitline services vary by state, can include text messaging and web coaching support, and may provide free 
samples of nicotine replacement therapy.
State-by-state information about Quitline services is available at https://www.cdc.gov/tobacco/patient-care/
quitlines-other/index.html
Web-based: American Lung Association  
Freedom From Smoking https://www.lung.org/
quit-smoking/join-freedom-from-smokingCreated by the American Lung Association to support smoking cessation in persons who want to quit. The 
program also provides information about nicotine replacement therapy and pharmacotherapy.
Multiple modes of support available to patients, including group clinics, a telephone-based “Lung HelpLine, ” a 
self-help guide, and a web-based interactive customized program.
Interactive program available for computer, tablet, or smartphone interface.
Web-based: National Cancer Institute
English: Smokefree.gov
Spanish: https://espanol.smokefree.gov/ 
SpanishSupported by the US Department of Health and Human Services and National Institutes of Health, created by 
the National Cancer Institute.
Website contains information about quitting and resources for quitting and allows users to create a  
personalized quit plan.
Specific websites are also available for women, teens, Veterans, and those >60 y of age.
Programs available through the website include: SmokefreeTXT (text messaging program), QuitGuide, and 
quitSTART (mobile phone apps).
Web-based: Asian Smokers’ Quitline
Mandarin, Cantonese, Korean, and Vietnamese 
Speakers https://www.asiansmokersquitline.
org/Operated by the Moores Cancer Center at the University of California, San Diego, funded by a grant from the 
US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.
Created to support tobacco cessation for persons who speak Mandarin, Cantonese, Korean, and Vietnamese 
across the United States.
Some participants may be eligible for a 2-wk starter kit of nicotine patches.
Telephone counseling developed to deliver a quit plan and support quitting, and printed self-help materials 
sent to participants.
Web-based: BecomeAnEX
Available in English and Spanish  
https://www.becomeanex.orgCreated by the Truth Initiative, a nonprofit public education in partnership with the Mayo Clinic Nicotine  
Dependence Center.
Website with information about cessation of smoking, vaping, or use of smokeless tobacco, with resources to 
build an individualized quit plan.
Includes support from experts and an online community, and a text message–based program for quitting  
vaping focused on teens and young adults, “This is Quitting. ”
An employer-based program, the EX Program, is also available through the Truth Initiative.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on November 12, 2025

CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINESCirculation. 2023;148:e9–e119. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000001168 August 29, 2023
Virani et al 2023 AHA/ACC/ACCP/ASPC/NLA/PCNA Chronic Coronary Disease Guideline e33in patients with CCD.39,40 Mindfulness-based and 
psychotherapy interventions (eg, meditation, yoga, 
cognitive-behavioral therapy) improve depression, 
anxiety, stress, social support, and cardiovascular 
risk factors in patients with CCD but not all-cause 
or cardiovascular mortality, QOL, recurrent MI, or 
revascularization.41–44 Pharmacological treatment 
of depression in patients with CCD is reasonable 
with consideration of adverse effects.4,45
4.2.3. Tobacco Products
Recommendations for Tobacco Products
Referenced studies that support the recommendations are  
summarized in the Online Data Supplement. 
COR LOE Recommendations 
1 A 1. In patients with CCD, tobacco use should be 
assessed at every health care visit to facilitate 
identification of those who may benefit from 
behavioral or pharmacologic interventions.*1–3
1 A 2. Patients with CCD who regularly smoke tobacco 
should be advised to quit at every visit.*4
1 A 3. In patients with CCD who regularly smoke tobacco, 
behavioral interventions are recommended to 
maximize cessation rates in combination with 
pharmacotherapy, including bupropion, varenicline, 
or combination long- and short-acting nicotine 
replacement therapy (NRT).*5–7
2b B-R 4. In patients with CCD who regularly smoke tobacco, 
varenicline may be considered versus bupropion or 
NRT to increase cessation rates.6
2b B-R 5. In patients with CCD who regularly smoke tobacco, 
the short-term use of nicotine-containing e-ciga-
rettes may be considered to aid smoking cessation, 
although the risk of sustained use and unknown 
long-term safety may outweigh the benefits.8–10
3: Harm B-NR 6. Patients with CCD should avoid secondhand 
smoke exposure to reduce risk of cardiovascular 
events.*11,12
*Modified from the 2019 ACC/AHA Guideline on the Primary Prevention of 
Cardiovascular Disease.13
Synopsis
Tobacco smoke exposure, in particular cigarette smoking, 
is a leading cause of CVD and cardiovascular events in 
persons with CCD.14–18 Cigarette smoke adversely affects 
endothelial function, promotes atherosclerosis, and is pro-
thrombotic.19 Beneficial short-term effects of smoking 
cessation include a decrease in heart rate and BP and im-
proved endothelial function.20,21 Prospective cohort studies 
of patients with CCD show that smoking cessation is as-
sociated with a 36% reduction in death and a 32% reduc-
tion in MI.22 Pharmacotherapy and behavioral therapy in 
combination can increase the success of smoking cessa-
tion. Observational studies on smokeless tobacco (includ-
ing snuff, snus, and chewing tobacco) and cardiovascular 
risk have found mixed results, but an increased risk of 
coronary heart disease events may be observed, albeit to 
a lesser degree than cigarette smoking.23–26Recommendation-Specific Supportive Text
 1. Most persons who smoke report they want to quit 
smoking, although annual quit rates among those 
who smoke are <10%.2 Systematic assessment 
of tobacco and e-cigarette use is the first step 
to facilitating smoking cessation, but clinicians 
often do not screen for tobacco use.3 Routine 
screening for smoking status by clinicians has 
been shown to increase the rate of clinician inter-
vention to promote smoking cessation. Screening 
for smoking can also allow clinicians to reinforce 
continued abstinence among those who have 
successfully quit and identify patients who may 
have relapsed. Electronic health record-based 
interventions that include a means to document 
smoking status and other tools such as clinician 
prompts or decision support, can improve pro-
cess outcomes, such as referral to smoking ces-
sation programs or documentation of smoking 
cessation counseling, although electronic health 
record-based documentation of smoking status 
alone has not improved quit rates.27 ,28 Data are 
unavailable on the effect of screening and most 
other tobacco cessation interventions on quit 
rates for persons who use smokeless tobacco and 
e-cigarettes. Nicotine-containing e-cigarette use 
is increasing, including among never-smokers, 
and many cigarette smokers have become “dual 
users,” using both e-cigarettes and cigarettes.29 
Meta-analyses suggest that smokeless tobacco 
use is associated with increased risk of CHD 
events, albeit to a lesser degree than cigarette 
smoking.23–25 E-cigarettes may increase the risk 
of CHD and cardiovascular events, and long-term 
risks of e-cigarettes are unknown.8,30–37 Given 
these risks, screening for use as part of compre-
hensive risk assessment may be reasonable.
 2. Even brief advice to quit tobacco smoking provided 
by a clinician increases the rate of quitting in per-
sons who smoke (relative risk, 1.66 [95% CI, 1.42-
1.94]).4 Other members of the care team, including 
nurses, community pharmacists, and oral health 
professionals, can also effectively provide behav-
ioral support for smoking cessation.7 Messages 
to patients should be clear, personalized, non-
judgmental, and focus on the benefits of smoking 
cessation, such as: “Quitting smoking is the most 
important thing you can do for your heart health.”38
 3. Behavioral therapy is also effective for smoking 
cessation including group and individual in-person 
counseling, telephone-based support, interactive 
internet-based interventions, and text message–
based interventions.7 A meta-analysis of 37 RCTs 
of behavioral interventions for smoking cessa-
tion in persons with CCD found a 22% increase 
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on November 12, 2025

CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINESAugust 29, 2023 Circulation. 2023;148:e9–e119. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000001168
Virani et al 2023 AHA/ACC/ACCP/ASPC/NLA/PCNA Chronic Coronary Disease Guideline e34in abstinence rates at 6 to 12 months.7, 3 9 Table 8 
describes behavioral support programs available 
throughout the United States. NRT and varenicline 
have been shown to increase the success of smok-
ing cessation in the overall population who smoke 
daily, including persons with CCD.6,40–46 The effec-
tiveness of NRT is highest when used as a com-
bination of long- and short-acting NRT.45 Adding 
behavioral therapy to pharmacotherapy increases 
quit rates.47 In 2011, the FDA issued a warning for 
possible increased risk of cardiovascular events in 
persons with CVD who use varenicline. One meta-
analysis of trials through 2016 found no increased 
cardiovascular risk in persons receiving vareni-
cline.48 Subsequently, a trial randomized 8058 per-
sons to bupropion, varenicline, or NRT and found 
no difference in cardiovascular events among the 3 
groups.44 Trials of pharmacotherapy and behavioral 
therapy for smoking cessation typically enroll per-
sons who smoke cigarettes daily; more research 
is needed on the efficacy and optimal strategy for 
smoking cessation among those who smoke inter-
mittently, those who use smokeless tobacco, and 
those who use e-cigarettes.
 4. Varenicline is more effective than bupropion or 
NRT in achieving abstinence from cigarette smok-
ing in meta-analyses of randomized trials, with a 
pooled estimate from 5 trials (n=5877 persons) 
showing a relative risk versus bupropion of 1.39 
(95% CI, 1.25-1.54), and a pooled estimate of 
8 trials (N=6264 persons) showing a relative 
risk versus NRT of 1.25 (95% CI, 1.14-1.37) for 
abstinence favoring varenicline.49 One network 
meta-analysis evaluated the efficacy of RCTs of 
smoking cessation specifically among those with 
CVD and concluded that varenicline was more 
effective than bupropion or NRT, although no tri-
als have compared various agents with each other 
in patients with CCD.6 The ultimate choice of 
pharmacotherapy for smoking cessation should 
incorporate patients’ previous experiences, pref-
erences, and comorbidities (see “2018 ACC 
Expert Consensus Decision Pathway on Tobacco 
Cessation Treatment” for dosing information and 
information about pharmacotherapy for smoking 
cessation).38 No data are available on the efficacy 
of pharmacologic therapy to support cessation of 
either e-cigarettes or smokeless tobacco. More 
research is needed on how to optimize both phar-
macologic and behavioral therapy to support ces-
sation of smokeless tobacco and e-cigarettes.
 5. Twenty-nine RCTs evaluated the efficacy of 
e-cigarettes on smoking cessation, including 5 
at low risk of bias.9 In meta-analyses, nicotine 
e-cigarettes appeared to be more effective than 
NRT for smoking cessation (relative risk, 1.69 [95% CI, 1.25-2.27]), corresponding to a 4% 
absolute increase in the success rates of smok-
ing cessation compared with NRT.9 Persons using 
e-cigarettes for smoking cessation are at risk of 
long-term dependence. In 1 trial, 80% of those 
assigned to the e-cigarette group who success-
fully quit smoking were still using the device at 1 
year (versus only 9% still using NRT in the NRT 
arm).10 Nicotine e-cigarettes appear to affect 
endothelial function, vascular stiffness, and BP 
less than combustible cigarettes.33,34,36 No data are 
available on the long-term risks of e-cigarettes on 
overall health and cardiovascular risk, but physi-
ologic and toxicology studies suggest that e-cig-
arettes may increase cardiovascular risk.8,30–37 
Substantial variability exists in e-cigarette addi-
tives, flavorings, and nicotine dose in e-cigarette 
liquid; the effect on cardiovascular risk is unknown. 
Because of the lack of long-term safety data and 
high rates of ongoing use, nicotine e-cigarettes 
should not be recommended as first-line therapy 
for smoking cessation. Patients with CCD who use 
e-cigarettes to support smoking cessation should 
be warned about the risks of developing long-term 
dependence and encouraged to quit use of e-cig-
arettes promptly to avoid potential long-term risks.
 6. Secondhand smoke exposure has similar deleteri-
ous physiologic effects as active cigarette smok-
ing.50,51 Even low doses of exposure to secondhand 
smoke exposure are associated with a marked 
increase in the risk of ischemic heart disease 
events, including recurrent events in patients with 
previous MI.11,12,50–52 Many persons are exposed 
to secondhand smoke exposure via their work-
places and may not individually be able to avoid 
exposure. For this reason, policy-level interventions 
are necessary to decrease occupational second-
hand smoke exposure. Policies designed to reduce 
secondhand smoke exposure, such as smoke-free 
workplaces and restaurant policies, are associated 
with lower population-level risk of CVD.
4.2.4. Alcohol and Substance Use
Recommendations for Alcohol and Substance Use
Referenced studies that support the recommendations are  
summarized in the Online Data Supplement. 
COR LOE Recommendations 
1 C-LD 1. Patients with CCD should be routinely asked and 
counseled about substance use to reduce ASCVD 
events.1–5
2a B-NR 2. In patients with CCD who consume alcohol,  
it is reasonable to limit alcohol intake (≤1 drink/d 
for women, ≤2 drinks/d for men) to reduce  
cardiovascular and all-cause death.6–8
3: No 
BenefitB-NR 3. Patients with CCD should not be advised to  
consume alcohol for the purpose of cardiovascular 
protection. 9,10
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on November 12, 2025

CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINESCirculation. 2023;148:e9–e119. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000001168 August 29, 2023
Virani et al 2023 AHA/ACC/ACCP/ASPC/NLA/PCNA Chronic Coronary Disease Guideline e35Synopsis
Various substances can have adverse effects on the car-
diovascular system, including cocaine, amphetamines, opi-
oids, alcohol, and marijuana (Table 9). These substances 
also have the potential for abuse and drug-drug interac-
tions with cardiovascular therapies. Because some of 
these substances are illicit (eg, cocaine, heroin), studies 
examining the link between substances and patients with 
CCD are limited, observational, and with imprecise mea-
sures of exposure risk. Although observational data show 
a J-shaped relationship between alcohol consumption 
and cardiovascular risk, no RCTs support moderate alco-
hol consumption to reduce cardiovascular risk.6,11 In fact, 
recent studies suggest that no safe level of alcohol use 
is acceptable and that previously observed cardioprotec-
tive effects of light-to-moderate alcohol use are likely con-
founded by other lifestyle and sociodemographic factors.8 
With the recent legalization of marijuana and its derivatives 
in some states, its use in patients with CCD is expected 
to grow.1 A scientific statement from the AHA highlights 
the cardiac-specific effects of cannabis, including stimula-
tion of the sympathetic nervous system, platelet activation, 
endothelial dysfunction, and carbon monoxide toxicity from 
smoking and inhalation.12 Observational studies of the as-
sociation between marijuana and cardiovascular events are limited by selection bias with rigorous data about the long-
term effect of marijuana and cardiovascular risk lacking.12,13 
The AHA released a scientific statement discussing the 
importance of distinguishing and managing out-of-hospital 
cardiac arrests from opioids and in engaging patients with 
opioid use disorders in secondary prevention programs.14 
Because of potential cardiac toxicity, drug-drug interac-
tions, and high risk for misuse, long-term opioid use for 
patients with CCD and chronic pain should be avoided. For 
recommendations regarding tobacco products, please see 
Section 4.2.3.
Recommendation-Specific Supportive Text
 1. Substance use is underrecognized and can be a 
significant contributor to CVD risk and outcomes.1,3,5 
Alcohol and other substances, such as cocaine, 
amphetamines, opioids, and marijuana can have par-
ticular adverse cardiovascular effects among patients 
with CCD (Table 9) and lead to premature or recur-
rent CVD events. A study across 2 large tertiary care 
centers found that drug use was observed in 10% 
of patients <50 years of age presenting with an 
MI from 2000 to 2016.2 Similarly, recreational sub-
stance use of alcohol, cannabis, and amphetamines 
was independently associated with premature 
CVD in the nationwide Veterans Affairs Healthcare 
database and the VITAL (Veterans with Premature 
Atherosclerosis) registry.15 Single-question screen-
ing for unhealthy alcohol and drug use has been 
validated in primary care settings.4 These simple 
screening questions can also be self-administered.
 2. There is a J-shaped relationship between alcohol 
consumption and death, although data on alcohol 
consumption is of variable quality. Proposed mech-
anisms supporting beneficial effects of moderate 
alcohol consumption include favorable effects on 
lipids, platelet aggregation, insulin resistance, and 
endothelial function.16 In the United States, 1 “stan-
dard” drink contains about 14 g of pure alcohol, 
which is typically found in 12 oz of regular beer (usu-
ally about 5% alcohol), 5 oz of wine (usually about 
12% alcohol), and 1.5 oz of distilled spirits (usually 
about 40% alcohol).17 Observational studies have 
consistently found an inverse association between 
light-to-moderate alcohol consumption and vascu-
lar risk.18 In patients with CVD, a similar observation 
has been documented with light-to-moderate alco-
hol consumption (5–25 g/d) associated with lower 
incidence of cardiovascular and all-cause death.6,8,7 
Conversely, heavy, episodic drinking (binge drink-
ing) is consistently associated with higher cardio-
vascular risk including acute myocardial infarction.
 3. All available data on the benefit of alcohol on 
cardiovascular risk are observational and subject 
to confounding. In the absence of a randomized Table 9. Substances With Abuse Potential and Adverse  
Cardiovascular Effects for Patients With CCD*
Substance Potential Adverse Cardiovascular Effects 
Alcohol J-shaped relationship between alcohol intake and 
cardiovascular risk in observational studies but limited 
by confounding.18
Heavy alcohol use and binge drinking associated with 
increased morbidity and mortality rates.9,10,19
May increase serum triglycerides.
Potential drug-drug interactions with cardiovascular 
therapies.
Cocaine,  
methamphetamineStimulation of the sympathetic nervous system.5,20
Platelet activation and aggregation.20
Increased myocardial oxygen demand.5
Can present with cocaine-associated chest pain.
MI risk independent of route of administration.21
Opioids Possible association with risk of MI in chronic use.22
High potential for dependence and abuse with chronic 
use.
Potential for drug-drug interactions with  
cardiovascular therapies.
Marijuana Stimulation of the sympathetic nervous system.
Platelet activation.
Endothelial dysfunction.
Carbon monoxide toxicity from smoking and  
inhalatation.12
Route of administration may impact toxicity, with  
edible products associated with fewer acute  
cardiovascular symptoms.23
*List is not all inclusive.
CCD indicates chronic coronary disease; and MI, myocardial infarction.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on November 12, 2025

CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINESAugust 29, 2023 Circulation. 2023;148:e9–e119. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000001168
Virani et al 2023 AHA/ACC/ACCP/ASPC/NLA/PCNA Chronic Coronary Disease Guideline e36clinical trial, data are insufficient to recommend 
alcohol for cardioprotection.11 In fact, a recent 
genetic analysis found that the causal associa-
tion between light-to-moderate levels of alcohol 
intake and lower CVD risk are likely mediated 
by confounding lifestyle factors.8 In patients with 
CCD, excessive alcohol is linked to hypertension, 
increased mortality rate, and recurrent cardiovas-
cular events. PRIME (Prospective Epidemiological 
Study of Myocardial Infarction) found that binge 
drinking (>50 g at least once a week) was associ-
ated with a higher risk of coronary events (hazard 
ratio, 2.03 [95% CI, 1.41-2.94]) compared with reg-
ular drinking.10 In the Determinants of Myocardial 
Infarction Onset Study across 45 community and 
tertiary-care medical centers, binge drinking was 
associated with a 2-fold higher mortality rate after 
an acute MI.9 The Global Burden of Disease 2016 
analysis confirmed a J-shaped relationship with 
alcohol and outcomes, but the benefit appeared 
to be offset by increasing cancer risks, conclud-
ing that the level of alcohol consumption that mini-
mized harm was zero.19 Therefore, patients who do 
not drink alcohol or who have a medical reason 
to avoid alcohol (eg, liver dysfunction, drug-drug 
interactions) should not be encouraged to drink 
alcohol for the purposes of cardiovascular pro-
tection. Clinicians should further counsel their 
patients against binge drinking.
4.2.5. Sexual Health and Activity
Recommendations for Sexual Health and Activity
Referenced studies that support the recommendations are  
summarized in the Online Data Supplement. 
COR LOE Recommendations 
2a B-NR 1. In patients with CCD, it is reasonable to individual-
ize resumption of sexual activity based on type of 
sexual activity, exercise capacity, and postproce-
dural healing.*1,2
2a B-NR 2. In patients with CCD, cardiac rehabilitation and 
regular exercise can be useful to reduce the risk of 
cardiovascular complications with sexual activity.*3
3: Harm B-NR 3. In patients with CCD, phosphodiesterase type 5 inhibi-
tors should not be used concomitantly with nitrate 
medications because of risk for severe hypotension.*4
*Modified from the 2012 AHA Scientific Statement on Sexual Activity and 
Cardiovascular Disease.5
Synopsis
Sexual health is important to QOL. Sexual activity repre-
sents moderate physical activity at around 3 to 5 meta-
bolic equivalents.5 If a patient with CCD can reach this 
level during exercise testing without ischemia or symp-
toms, then the risk for ischemia during sexual activity is 
low, especially considering the short exposure period.2 
It is rare for a patient to die from cardiac disease dur-ing sexual intercourse; in this regard, men appear more 
at risk than women,6 with the absolute rate being very 
small. Sexual activity is associated with 1% of all MIs.3 
Men and women with CCD and its risk factors have a 
high prevalence of sexual dysfunction.7 Recent MI and 
coronary artery bypass surgery may additionally compro-
mise sexual function5; in this regard, sexual counselling 
may be helpful, and resuming sexual activity does not 
appear to be associated with an increased risk of death. 
Of particular relevance to patients with CCD is the need 
to avoid the combined use of nitrates with phosphodies-
terase type 5 inhibitors.4
Recommendation-Specific Supportive Text
 1. Recommendations after PCI and CABG may 
depend on whether femoral or radial access was 
performed, and whether surgery was performed 
in a sternal-sparing manner.5,8 The patient should 
be well compensated, euvolemic, and without sig-
nificant angina. Patients with CCD who are func-
tionally well compensated or patients with no or 
mild angina, given the low risk of MI or sudden 
death, should be considered safe for sexual activ-
ity. Sexual activity represents an exercise level 
of approximately 3 to 5 metabolic equivalents, 
compared with a typical exercise treadmill test 
that involves approximately 4 metabolic equiva-
lents. The risk of MI or sudden death result-
ing from sexual activity is very low. 3 Patients 
with CCD who want to engage in sexual activ-
ity should undergo a medical evaluation, similar 
to other forms of exercise in the presence of 
CCD.5 Because sexual activity is associated with 
increased metabolic requirements, patients with 
unstable or decompensated CCD should refrain 
from sexual activity.5
 2. In addition to a recommendation for CR incorpo-
rating sexual counseling, in men with CCD, con-
servative measures such as sexual rehabilitation, 
consisting of 12 weeks of sexual rehabilitation 
with physical exercise training, pelvic floor exer-
cise and psychoeducation, was associated with 
better sexual function by the International Index of 
Erectile Function.9,10
 3. Phosphodiesterase type 5 inhibitors should not be 
used concomitantly with nitrate medications, often 
used to treat CCD, because of the potential for 
severe hypotension.4 Sildenafil and vardenafil have 
half-lives of ∼4 hours. Tadalafil is long-acting and 
has a half-life of 17 .5 hours. Patients on sildenafil 
or vardenafil should avoid taking nitroglycerine for 
≥24 hours (≥48 hours for tadalafil).5 In patients 
on long-acting nitrate therapy who want to use a 
phosphodiesterase type 5 inhibitor, decision on the 
use of phosphodiesterase type 5 inhibitor should 
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on November 12, 2025

CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINESCirculation. 2023;148:e9–e119. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000001168 August 29, 2023
Virani et al 2023 AHA/ACC/ACCP/ASPC/NLA/PCNA Chronic Coronary Disease Guideline e37be guided by the need for continued nitrate ther-
apy versus other alternative options available to the 
treating clinician.
4.2.6. Lipid Management
Recommendations for Lipid Management
Referenced studies that support the recommendations are  
summarized in the Online Data Supplement. 
COR LOE Recommendations 
1 A 1. In patients with CCD, high-intensity statin ther-
apy is recommended with the aim of achieving 
a ≥50% reduction in LDL-C levels to reduce 
the risk of MACE.*1–3
1 A 2. In patients in whom high-intensity statin 
therapy is contraindicated or not tolerated, 
moderate-intensity statin therapy is recom-
mended with the aim of achieving a 30% to 
49% reduction in LDL-C levels to reduce the 
risk of MACE.*2,4–8
1 A 3. In patients with CCD, adherence to changes in 
lifestyle and effects of lipid-lowering medication 
should be assessed by measurement of fasting 
lipids in 4 to 12 weeks after statin initiation or  
dose adjustment and then every 3 to 12 
months thereafter based on need to assess 
response or adherence to therapy.*2,9–11
Cost Value 
Statement:
High 
ValueB-NR 4. In patients with CCD, the use of generic  
formulations of maximally tolerated statin 
therapy is projected to be cost saving.12,13
2a B-R 5. In patients with CCD who are judged to be at 
very high risk (Table 10) and on maximally tol-
erated statin therapy with an LDL-C level ≥70 
mg/dL (≥1.8 mmol/L), ezetimibe can be ben-
eficial to further reduce the risk of MACE.*14–19
Cost Value 
Statement:
High 
ValueB-NR 6. In patients with CCD, addition of generic  
ezetimibe to maximally tolerated statin therapy 
in appropriately selected patients is projected 
to be of high economic value at US prices.12,20,21
2a A 7 . In patients with CCD who are judged to be 
at very high risk (Table 10) and who have an 
LDL-C level ≥70 mg/dL (≥1.8 mmol/L), or 
a non–high-density lipoprotein cholesterol 
(HDL-C) level ≥100 mg/dL (≥2.6 mmol/L), 
on maximally tolerated statin and ezetimibe, a 
PCSK9 monoclonal antibody can be beneficial 
to further reduce the risk of MACE.*22–29
Cost Value 
Statement:
UncertainB-NR 8. In patients with CCD who are very high risk, 
the use of PCSK9 monoclonal antibodies is 
projected to be of uncertain economic value at 
US prices12,20,21,30,31
2b B-R 9. In patients with CCD on maximally tolerated 
statin therapy with an LDL-C level <100 mg/
dL (<2.6 mmol/L) and a persistent fasting tri-
glyceride level of 150 to 499 mg/dL (1.7–5.6 
mmol/L) after addressing secondary causes, 
icosapent ethyl may be considered to further 
reduce the risk of MACE and cardiovascular 
death.32
2b B-R 10. In patients with CCD who are not at very 
high risk and on maximally tolerated statin 
therapy with an LDL-C level ≥ 70 mg/dL 
(≥1.8 mmol/L), it may be reasonable to 
add ezetimibe to further reduce the risk of 
MACE.*14,15,18,192b B-R 11. In patients with CCD on maximally tolerated 
statin therapy who have an LDL-C level ≥70 
mg/dL (≥1.8 mmol/L), and in whom ezetimibe 
and PCSK9 monoclonal antibody are deemed 
insufficient or not tolerated, it may be reason-
able to add bempedoic acid33,34 or inclisiran35 
(in place of PCSK9 monoclonal antibody) to 
further reduce LDL-C levels.
3: No  
BenefitB-R 12. In patients with CCD receiving statin therapy, 
adding niacin,36,37 or fenofibrate38 or dietary 
supplements containing omega-3 fatty acids, 
are not beneficial in reducing cardiovascular 
risk.39–41
*Modified from the 2018 AHA/ACC/Multisociety Guideline on the Manage-
ment of Blood Cholesterol.42
Synopsis
LDL-C is a primary cause of atherosclerotic disease 
and target of lipid management.38 RCTs established the 
efficacy and safety of high-intensity statin therapy as 
the preferred initial approach to reduce LDL-C levels by 
≥50% and reduce cardiovascular morbidity and mortal-
ity rates (Figure 8).1–3 Despite maximally tolerated statin 
therapy, residual cardiovascular risk persists, especially 
among patients with CCD and additional high-risk clini-
cal factors (Table 10).14–17 Several nonstatins36–38 did not 
provide benefit when added to background statin thera-
py; however, ezetimibe, PCSK9 monoclonal antibodies, 
and icosapent ethyl further reduce cardiovascular risk 
when added to background statin therapy.15,22,23,32 Bem-
pedoic acid and inclisiran have only recently become 
available and, although they effectively reduce LDL-C 
levels,34,35 RCTs are ongoing to determine their effect 
on MACE. Clinicians should prioritize use of ezetimibe 
and PCSK9 monoclonal antibodies when additional 
LDL-C lowering is necessary in patients on maximally 
tolerated statin therapy unless not tolerated or effec-
tive in achieving desired LDL-C levels. Regardless of 
the lipid-lowering regimen, lipid monitoring is essential 
to assess individual response to lipid-lowering therapy 
and monitor adherence and persistence with therapy 
over time.9–11
Recommendation-Specific Supportive Text
 1. The CTT (Cholesterol Treatment Trialists) meta-
analysis of 5 RCTs showed that LDL-C lowering 
with high-intensity statins compared with mod-
erate-intensity statins reduces major vascular 
events by 15% (Table 11).2 This benefit occurred 
irrespective of age, even among patients >75 
years of age with established ASCVD.2,3 Greater 
absolute reductions in LDL-C were associated 
with a greater proportional reduction in MACE. 
The greatest absolute benefit from statin therapy Recommendations for Lipid Management (Continued )
COR LOE Recommendations 
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on November 12, 2025

CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINESAugust 29, 2023 Circulation. 2023;148:e9–e119. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000001168
Virani et al 2023 AHA/ACC/ACCP/ASPC/NLA/PCNA Chronic Coronary Disease Guideline e38is observed in those with the highest base-
line LDL-C levels and at similar risk of events. 
Furthermore, percent reduction in LDL-C appears 
to provide additional prognostic value over-
achieved LDL-C levels.43 The expected percent 
reduction in LDL-C levels with high-intensity 
statin therapy is ≥ 50% and should be used to 
assess clinical efficacy. However, baseline LDL-C 
levels in patients before statin initiation are not 
always available in clinical practice. The threshold 
of LDL-C ≥ 70 mg/dL is then useful to determine 
whether to intensify lipid management.
 2. Although high-intensity statin therapy is preferred, 
high-intensity statin therapy may not be toler-
ated by some patients or may be contraindicated 
because of clinically significant drug-drug interac-
tions.44 Statin intolerance is defined as adverse 
effects associated with statin therapy that improve 
or resolve with dose modification or discontinu-
ation of statin therapy; and requires a trial of at 
least 2 statins with one at the lowest approved daily dose.45 Statin intolerance may also be com-
plete or partial (tolerating less than the recom-
mended statin intensity). Clinicians should also 
consider the possibility of a “nocebo effect”—
patient expectation of harm resulting in perceived 
adverse effects.46 Multiple RCTs showed that 
moderate-intensity statin therapy also reduces 
cardiovascular events and death among patients 
with established ASCVD, including those >75 
years of age; therefore, a moderate-intensity statin 
should be used in patients unable to tolerate a 
high-intensity statin.2,4–8 Additional strategies may 
also be used to identify a tolerable statin regimen 
(eg, low-intensity statin, alternative daily dosing) to 
reduce LDL-C but it is unclear if these strategies 
also reduce the risk of ASCVD events.47
 3. The goal for LDL-C lowering is defined as percent-
age responses in LDL-C relative to baseline levels. 
Although reductions in LDL-C are expected with 
moderate- and high-intensity statins (Table 11), 
individual response can vary substantially.11 The 
maximum percentage change in LDL-C occurs 
within 4 to 12 weeks after initiation of or change 
in lipid-lowering therapy. The Friedewald equa-
tion is known to underestimate LDL-C in the set-
ting of elevated TG levels, thus other approaches 
to LDL-C measurement (eg, Martin/Hopkins 
method) may be desirable.48,49 Obtaining lipid pro-
file measurements every 3 to 12 months is asso-
ciated with increased adherence to therapy and 
identification of patients requiring further inten-
sification of treatment.9,10 See Sections 4.4.3 and 
5 of the 2018 AHA/ACC multisociety cholesterol 
guideline50 for additional information regarding 
efficacy and safety monitoring.
 4. The economic value of a lipid-lowering therapy 
depends on the absolute benefit (in terms of 
the number of cardiovascular events averted or 
quality-adjusted life years [QAL Y] gained) that 
patients derive from receiving the treatment rela-
tive to the comparator as well as the cost of the 
therapy being evaluated.13 Because of the very low 
annual cost of generic formulations of statins in 
the United States, the use of maximally tolerated 
statin therapy in patients with CCD is projected 
to be cost-saving (ie, the lifetime savings from 
averted cardiovascular events more than offset 
the lifetime cost of statin therapy and resulting 
adverse effects).12 Note that this value statement 
should not be extrapolated to higher-cost branded 
formulations of statins.
 5. In IMPROVE-IT (Improved Reduction of 
Outcomes; Vytorin Efficacy International Trial), 
the addition of ezetimibe to moderate-intensity 
statin therapy among patients with ACS resulted 
in a significant ASCVD risk reduction (7% relative Table 10. Very High-Risk* of Future ASCVD Events
Definition of Very High-Risk*
History of multiple major ASCVD events
OR
One major ASCVD event AND ≥2 high-risk conditions
Major ASCVD Events
Recent ACS (within the past 12 mo)
History of MI (other than recent ACS events listed above)
History of ischemic stroke
 Symptomatic peripheral artery disease (history of claudication with ABI 
<0.85, or previous revascularization or amputation)51
High-Risk Conditions
Age ≥65 y
Familial hypercholesterolemia†
 History of previous coronary artery bypass graft surgery or percutaneous 
coronary intervention outside of the major ASCVD event(s)
Diabetes
Hypertension
Chronic kidney disease (eGFR, 15–59 mL/min/1.73 m2)15,29
Current tobacco smoking
 Persistently elevated LDL-C ≥100 mg/dL despite maximally tolerated statin 
therapy and ezetimibe
History of congestive heart failure
*Very high-risk includes a history of multiple major ASCVD events or 1 major 
ASCVD event and multiple high-risk conditions.
†Management of patients with familial hypercholesterolemia often requires 
combination lipid lowering therapy and referral to a lipid specialist, and possibly 
lipoprotein apheresis.58,59
ABI indicates ankle brachial index; ACS, acute coronary syndrome; ASCVD, 
atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease; CKD, chronic kidney disease; eGFR, es-
timated glomerular filtration rate; LDL-C, low-density lipoprotein cholesterol; and 
MI, myocardial infarction.
Modified with permission from Grundy SM, et al.42 Copyright 2019 American 
Heart Association, Inc., and American College of Cardiology Foundation.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on November 12, 2025

CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINESCirculation. 2023;148:e9–e119. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000001168 August 29, 2023
Virani et al 2023 AHA/ACC/ACCP/ASPC/NLA/PCNA Chronic Coronary Disease Guideline e39risk reduction; 2% absolute risk reduction) at a 
median follow-up of 6 years.15 An analysis using 
the TIMI (Thrombolysis in Myocardial Infarction) 
Risk Score for Secondary Prevention (TRS 2 P) 
found the addition of ezetimibe was associated 
with significantly greater risk reduction (19% 
relative risk reduction; 6.3% absolute risk reduc-
tion) among patients with ≥ 3 high-risk features, 
with more modest benefit among those with 2 
high-risk features and no benefit among those 
with 0 or 1 additional features.14 Ezetimibe was 
allowed at study entry in both PCSK9 monoclonal 
antibody trials,23,24 but only 3% and 5%, respec-
tively, were on ezetimibe. No RCT has evaluated 
whether an ezetimibe-first strategy is preferred 
before adding a PCSK9 monoclonal antibody; 
however, clinicians should generally add ezetimibe 
first, then a PCSK9 monoclonal antibody, if nec-
essary, to achieve desired LDL-C levels, given the 
generic availability of ezetimibe, its once-daily oral 
administration, and proven long-term safety and 
tolerability. This is supported by 2 well-designed 
simulation studies showing that a high proportion 
of patients will achieve an LDL-C level of <70 mg/
dL with the addition of ezetimibe to high-intensity 
statin therapy.18,19
 6. Generic ezetimibe is an inexpensive drug, with net 
price of <$10 for a 1-month supply. To the extent 
that LDL-C lowering with ezetimibe translates to 
fewer lifetime MACE, the use of generic ezetimibe 
is likely to be improve health outcomes at mod-
est increase in cost, especially in very high-risk 
patients, resulting in high value (<$50 000 per QAL Y gained).12,20,21 However, the cost-effective-
ness of adding generic ezetimibe to maximally tol-
erated statin therapy is sensitive to the assumption 
regarding the effect of ezetimibe on cardiovascular 
and all-cause death.
 7 . Very high risk ASCVD is defined in Table 10. The effi-
cacy of alirocumab and evolocumab was shown in 
2 RCTs.22,23 The FOURIER (Further Cardiovascular 
Outcomes Research with PCSK9 Inhibition Subjects 
with Elevated Risk) trial evaluated evolocumab 
among those with established ASCVD with an LDL-C 
level of ≥ 70 mg/dL or non–HDL-C level of ≥ 100 
mg/dL on maximal statin with or without ezetimibe. 
Cardiovascular events were significantly reduced by 
15% with evolocumab, with greater benefit observed 
among those with additional high-risk clinical factors. 
No increased risk of neurocognitive adverse effects 
was observed, even among those achieving the very 
low levels of LDL-C.29 The ODYSSEY OUTCOMES 
(Evaluation of Cardiovascular Outcomes After an 
Acute Coronary Syndrome During Treatment with 
Alirocumab) trial evaluated alirocumab use in patients 
with an ACS event 1 to 12 months earlier on maxi-
mal statin with or without ezetimibe. Cardiovascular 
events were significantly reduced by 15% with ali-
rocumab, especially in those with additional high-
risk clinical factors.25–27 The absolute risk reduction 
was relatively modest (1.5% and 0.6%, respectively) 
in both trials, given the ∼ 60% reduction in LDL-C 
levels. However, analyses from both FOURIER and 
ODYSSEY Outcomes trials subsequently showed 
that among several groups of patients noted in 
the very high-risk ASCVD category (Table 10), the Table 11. High-, Moderate-, and Low-Intensity Statin Therapy*
High Intensity Moderate Intensity Low Intensity 
LDL-C Lowering† ≥50% 30%-49% <30%
Statins Atorvastatin (40 mg‡), 80 mg
Rosuvastatin 20 mg (40 mg)Atorvastatin 10 mg (20 mg)
Rosuvastatin (5 mg) 10 mg
Simvastatin 20-40 mg§Simvastatin 10 mg
Pravastatin 40 mg (80 mg)
Lovastatin 40 mg (80 mg)
Fluvastatin XL 80 mg
Fluvastatin 40 mg BID
Pitavastatin 1-4 mgPravastatin 10-20 mg
Lovastatin 20 mg
Fluvastatin 20-40 mg
Percent LDL-C reductions with the primary statin medications used in clinical practice (atorvastatin, rosuvastatin, simvastatin) were estimated using the median reduc-
tion in LDL-C from the VOYAGER database.11 Reductions in LDL-C for other statin medications (fluvastatin, lovastatin, pitavastatin, pravastatin) were identified according 
to FDA-approved product labeling in adults with hyperlipidemia, primary hypercholesterolemia, and mixed dyslipidemia.60 Boldface type indicates specific statins and 
doses that were evaluated in RCTs and the Cholesterol Treatment Trialists’ 2010 meta-analysis.2,3 These RCTs demonstrated a reduction in major cardiovascular events.
*Percent reductions are estimates from data across large populations. Individual responses to statin therapy varied in the RCTs and should be expected to vary in 
clinical practice.11
†LDL-C lowering that should occur with the dosage listed below each intensity.
‡Evidence from 1 RCT only: down titration if unable to tolerate atorvastatin 80 mg in the IDEAL (Incremental Decrease through Aggressive Lipid Lowering) study.61
§Although simvastatin 80 mg was evaluated in RCTs, initiation of simvastatin 80 mg or titration to 80 mg is not recommended by the FDA because of the increased 
risk of myopathy, including rhabdomyolysis.
FDA indicates US Food and Drug Administration; LDL-C, low-density lipoprotein cholesterol; RCT, randomized controlled trial; VOYAGER, an indiVidual patient data 
meta-analysis Of statin therapY in At risk Groups: Effects of Rosuvastatin, atorvastatin and simvastatin; and XL, extended release.
Reprinted with permission from Grundy SM, et al.42 Copyright 2019 American Heart Association, Inc., and American College of Cardiology Foundation.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on November 12, 2025

CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINESAugust 29, 2023 Circulation. 2023;148:e9–e119. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000001168
Virani et al 2023 AHA/ACC/ACCP/ASPC/NLA/PCNA Chronic Coronary Disease Guideline e40absolute risk of future ASCVD events was signifi-
cantly higher; therefore, the absolute risk reduction 
from the use of a PCSK9 monoclonal antibody was 
also much higher than the overall absolute risk reduc-
tions seen in the original trials.23,26,28,51,52 Although 
generally well tolerated, injection site reactions can 
occur, and long-term safety data are limited. Maximal 
LDL-C-lowering therapy should include maximally 
tolerated statin plus ezetimibe; however, ezetimibe 
may be insufficient when a ≥25% reduction in the 
LDL-C level is desired. Clinicians bypassing the addi-
tion of ezetimibe before adding a PCSK9 monoclo-
nal antibody should recognize this may not be cost 
effective (Figure 8). 8. The US cost of PCSK9 monoclonal antibodies has 
declined by 60% since their initial market entry 
(from approximately $14 000 per year to $5850 
per year), which, all things being equal, has improved 
the cost-effectiveness of these drugs.12,20,21 At this 
price point, the cost-effectiveness of the agents in 
very high risk patients with CCD is uncertain, with 
some studies projecting low economic value12,20 
and others suggesting intermediate to high eco-
nomic value.30,31 This value statement should not be 
extrapolated to patients with CCD who are at low 
to moderate risk of adverse cardiovascular events, 
in whom PCSK9 inhibitor monoclonal antibodies 
are of low economic value. The cost-effectiveness 
Figure 8. Lipid Management in Patients With CCD.
Colors correspond to Class of Recommendation in Table 3. Very high-risk includes a history of multiple major ASCVD events or 1 major ASCVD 
event and multiple high-risk conditions (Table 10). *Only when ezetimibe and PCSK9 mAb are deemed insufficient or not tolerated should 
bempedoic acid or inclisiran (in place of PCSK9 mAb) be considered to further reduce LDL-C levels. The effect of bempedoic acid and inclisiran 
on MACE is being evaluated. LDL-C indicates low-density lipoprotein cholesterol; HDL-C, high-density lipoprotein cholesterol; PCSK9 mAb, 
PCSK9 monoclonal antibody; RCT, randomized controlled trial; and TG, triglycerides. Adapted with permission from Grundy SM, et al.42 Copyright 
2019 American Heart Association, Inc., and American College of Cardiology Foundation.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on November 12, 2025

CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINESCirculation. 2023;148:e9–e119. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000001168 August 29, 2023
Virani et al 2023 AHA/ACC/ACCP/ASPC/NLA/PCNA Chronic Coronary Disease Guideline e41of a therapy is a function of the incremental cost 
of the therapy relative to the comparator, its effec-
tiveness relative to the comparator, as well as 
baseline risk of cardiovascular events in the target 
population. Patients who have higher baseline risk 
are likely to derive a larger absolute health benefit 
from an effective drug. It follows that CVD preven-
tion is more cost-effective in a population at higher 
risk of CVD events. Thus, PCSK9 inhibitors may 
be intermediate value in patients at higher-than-
average risk of recurrent events, such as those 
with a recent ACS, symptomatic peripheral artery 
disease, or familial hypercholesteremia (FH).12,20,21 
The cost-effectiveness of PCSK9 monoclonal anti-
body is also likely improved in patients who are 
unable to tolerate statins because of severe statin-
associated side effects.12
 9. REDUCE-IT (Reduction of Cardiovascular Events 
with Icosapent Ethyl-Intervention Trial) randomized 
patients with established ASCVD or diabetes plus 
additional risk factors, triglyceride levels between 
150 mg/dL and 499 mg/dL, and an LDL-C level 
of <100 mg/dL on background statin therapy, to 
either 4 g/day of icosapent ethyl (purified EPA 
only) or mineral oil placebo. Icosapent ethyl signifi-
cantly reduced the relative risk of MACE by 25% 
and cardiovascular death by 20%.32 The benefit 
appeared driven by the increase in EPA levels and 
not the modest 17% reduction in triglyceride levels. 
RESPECT-EPA (Randomized Trial for Evaluation 
in Secondary Prevention Efficacy of Combination 
Therapy-Statin and Eicosapentaenoic Acid) was 
another secondary prevention trial that showed a 
borderline significant reduction in MACE with icos-
apent ethyl 1800 mg/day (10.9% versus 14.9%; 
P=0.055) in 2506 participants enrolled in Japan 
on background statin therapy. Limitations of this 
trial were the lack of placebo control, and it was 
underpowered. Contrarily, the STRENGTH (Long-
Term Outcomes Study to Assess Statin Residual 
Risk with Epanova in High Cardiovascular Risk 
Patients with Hypertriglyceridemia) trial found no 
benefit with a 4 g/day carboxylic acid formulation 
of omega-3 fatty acids (EPA and DHA) compared 
with a corn oil placebo, and no association with 
harm or benefit in those at the highest achieved 
tertiles for EPA and DHA levels. Incident AF was 
more common with both icosapent ethyl and 
the carboxylic acid formulation of omega-3 fatty 
acids and has been observed in other studies of 
omega-3 fatty acid formulations. Several factors 
could explain the discrepant outcomes observed in 
these trials; however, the use of a mineral oil pla-
cebo in REDUCE-IT is of concern given its adverse 
effects on lipid and inflammatory biomarkers, sug-
gesting mineral oil may not be an inert placebo.53 For patients with LDL-C levels between 70 mg/
dL and <100 mg/dL, it is unclear whether further 
LDL-C lowering or adding icosapent ethyl is more 
effective. Patient preference and shared decision-
making are recommended, and secondary causes 
of elevated triglyceride levels (eg, medications, 
diabetes, lifestyle) should be addressed before 
considering icosapent ethyl. Dietary supplements 
containing omega-3 fatty acids are not acceptable 
substitutes for icosapent ethyl.
 10. In patients not at very high risk, there may be 
instances where high-intensity statin therapy is 
insufficient to achieve desired LDL-C levels or 
not tolerated. Although moderate-intensity statin 
therapy effectively reduces cardiovascular risk, it is 
inferior to high-intensity statin therapy.2 Additional 
LDL-C lowering may also be necessary in patients 
on moderate-intensity statin therapy with LDL-C 
levels ≥70 mg/dL. Adding ezetimibe to moderate-
intensity statin therapy may compensate for the 
reduced LDL-C lowering observed with moderate-
intensity statin therapy alone. Although the net 
benefit of ezetimibe may be less robust among 
patients not at very high risk, it is preferred before a 
PCSK9 monoclonal antibody for reasons provided 
in Recommendation 5.
 11. Bempedoic acid is a first-in class therapy ade-
nosine triphosphate-citrate lyase54 inhibitor that 
reduces LDL-C levels by 15% to 25% depending 
on the type and dose of background statin ther-
apy and is associated with fewer muscle-related 
adverse effects.33,34 It is also available in a combi-
nation product with ezetimibe that reduces LDL-C 
levels by ∼ 35%. Although it can be combined with 
statins, bempedoic acid should be avoided when 
using doses of simvastatin >20 mg daily or pravas-
tatin 40 mg daily because of an ∼ 2-fold increase in 
serum levels of both statins. Elevation in uric acid 
levels may occur with bempedoic acid use, and 
rare cases of tendon rupture have been reported. 
Inclisiran is a first-in-class small interfering RNA 
directed to break down PCSK9 mRNA, resulting in 
reduced synthesis of PCSK9.35 Inclisiran reduces 
LDL-C levels by approximately 50% and is admin-
istered as a single subcutaneous dose, with a 
second dose at 3 months, then every 6 months. 
Inclisiran administration must be performed by a 
health care professional, which may limit accessi-
bility. It is generally well tolerated, but injection site 
reactions can occur. The effect of bempedoic acid 
and inclisiran on MACE is currently under investi-
gation; therefore, nonstatin therapies with proven 
efficacy (ie, ezetimibe, PCSK9 monoclonal anti-
body) should be prioritized over these 2 therapies. 
Preliminary modeling studies project that the use 
of bempedoic acid or inclisiran in patients unable 
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on November 12, 2025

CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINESAugust 29, 2023 Circulation. 2023;148:e9–e119. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000001168
Virani et al 2023 AHA/ACC/ACCP/ASPC/NLA/PCNA Chronic Coronary Disease Guideline e42to tolerate statin therapy because of severe statin-
associated side effects is of intermediate value 
($50 000–$150 000 per QAL Y gained), as is the 
use of inclisiran in patients with CCD and hetero-
zygous FH.55 However, the cost-effectiveness of 
these novel therapies is sensitive to assumptions 
regarding the effect of each drug on cardiovas-
cular and all-cause death and should be updated 
when long-term outcomes data become available.
 12. Dietary supplements containing omega-3 fatty 
acids (ie, fish oil) are widely used for presumed car-
dioprotective benefits. However, low-dose omega-3 
fatty acid supplementation does not reduce MACE 
in patients with CCD.39–41 The only omega-3 fatty 
acid formulation that can be recommended in 
patients with CCD is icosapent ethyl (EPA only) 
as described in Recommendation 9. The AIM-
HIGH (Atherothrombosis Intervention in Metabolic 
Syndrome with Low HDL/High Triglycerides: 
Impact on Global Health) trial found no benefit with 
the addition of extended-release niacin to back-
ground statin therapy.36 Another niacin trial in sec-
ondary prevention, HPS2-THRIVE (Treatment of 
HDL to Reduce the Incidence of Vascular Events), 
also found no benefit with a combination product 
of niacin and laropiprant, a prostaglandin recep-
tor antagonist; however, this product is no longer 
available.37 ACCORD-LIPID (Action to Control 
Cardiovascular Risk in Diabetes-Lipid Trial)56 found 
no benefit with the addition of fenofibrate to back-
ground statin therapy. Although this trial was con-
ducted in patients with type 2 diabetes, more than 
half of the trial participants had established CVD at 
baseline, and no benefit was observed in this sub-
group of patients. A selective PPARα modulator, 
pemafibrate, was investigated in the PROMINENT 
(Pemafibrate to Reduce Cardiovascular Outcomes 
by Reducing Triglycerides in Diabetic Patients) trial 
in high-risk patients with diabetes, but this trial 
was stopped early for futility.57 Fenofibrate should 
only be considered for severe hypertriglyceridemia 
(triglycerides, ≥500 mg/dL) to reduce the risk of 
acute pancreatitis.
4.2.7. Blood Pressure Management
Recommendations for Blood Pressure Management
Referenced studies that support the recommendations are  
summarized in the Online Data Supplement. 
COR LOE Recommendations 
1 A 1. In adults with CCD, nonpharmacologic strategies 
are recommended as first-line therapy to lower 
BP in those with elevated BP (120-129/<80 mm 
Hg) (see Table 12).*1–9
1 B-R 2. In adults with CCD who have hypertension, a BP 
target of <130/<80 mm Hg is recommended to 
reduce CVD events and all-cause death.*10–141 B-R 3. In adults with CCD and hypertension (systolic BP 
≥130 and/or diastolic BP ≥80 mm Hg), in  
addition to nonpharmacological strategies, GDMT 
angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitors, 
angiotensin-receptor blockers (ARB), or beta 
blockers15–17 are recommended as first-line ther-
apy for compelling indications (eg, recent MI or 
angina), with additional antihypertensive medica-
tions (eg, dihydropyridine calcium channel block-
ers [CCB], long-acting thiazide diuretics, and/or 
mineralocorticoid receptor antagonists) added as 
needed to optimize BP control.*13,18
*Modified from the 2017 ACC/AHA Multisociety Guideline for the Prevention, 
Detection, Evaluation, and Management of High Blood Pressure in Adults.19
Synopsis
Hypertension is a well-established risk factor for CVD20 
and is a highly prevalent comorbid condition among indi-
viduals with CCD, affecting >60% of such individuals.21 
Individuals with CCD who also have hypertension are 
at increased risk of death and morbidity compared with 
individuals with CCD who are normotensive.22 Treatment 
of hypertension with lifestyle1-6,22 and medication thera-
pies13,16,17 ,23–28 helps control hypertension and reduce 
subsequent risk of MACE. The recommendations ap-
ply to individuals with CCD who have hypertension. See 
Section 4.2.1 for additional recommendations regard-
ing nutritional therapies and Sections 4.2.10 to 4.2.11 
for additional recommendations about physical activity 
and CR. For additional information, see the 2017 ACC/
AHA/multisociety guideline for the prevention, detec-
tion, evaluation, and management of high blood pres-
sure in adults.19
Recommendation-Specific Supportive Text
 1. Lifestyle-related factors influence BP levels, and 
lifestyle modifications are effective strategies 
to help lower elevated BP. These factors include 
weight loss,1,5 a heart-healthy diet that is rich in 
fruits and vegetables,2,3 reduced dietary sodium,29,30 
physical activity,4,8 and reduction or elimination of 
alcohol intake.6
 2. Among patients with increased cardiovascular risk, 
reduction of systolic BP to <130 mm Hg has been 
shown to reduce CVD complications by 25% and 
all-cause death by 27%.13 Optimal diastolic BP for 
clinical outcomes appears to be in the range of 70 
to 80 mm Hg.10,14
 3. In the HOPE (Heart Outcomes Prevention 
Evaluation) trial, ramipril therapy in patients with 
CVD or at high risk for CVD reduced the risk of MI, 
stroke, or CVD by 22% compared with placebo.16 
In patients with CAD and hypertension who 
were randomized into the INVEST (International Recommendations for Blood Pressure Management (Continued )
COR LOE Recommendations 
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on November 12, 2025

CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINESCirculation. 2023;148:e9–e119. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000001168 August 29, 2023
Virani et al 2023 AHA/ACC/ACCP/ASPC/NLA/PCNA Chronic Coronary Disease Guideline e43Verapamil SR/Trandolapril Study) trial, CCB and 
ACE inhibitors and beta-blocker/thiazide diuretic 
therapy had similar cardiovascular morbidity and 
death outcomes.31 In the EUROPA (Exclusive 
Endocrine Therapy or Partial Breast Irradiation 
for Women ≥ 70 Y ears Early Stage Breast Cancer) 
study involving patients with CCD, ACE inhibi-
tor therapy produced a 20% reduction in risk of 
CVD death, MI, or cardiac arrest compared with 
placebo.15 Beta blockers are particularly effec-
tive in patients with CCD, especially those with 
recent MI and those with ongoing angina, given 
their ability to reduce angina, improve angina-
free exercise tolerance, reduce exertion-related 
myocardial ischemia, and reduce risk of CVD  
events.17 ,23,27 ,32,33 Because of the significant ben-
efits from beta blockers and ACE inhibitors and 
ARB agents in patients with CCD, these medica-
tions are recommended as a first-line therapy in 
the treatment of hypertension in such individuals. 
GDMT beta blockers for CCD and for lowering 
BP include carvedilol, metoprolol tartrate, meto-
prolol succinate, nadolol, bisoprolol, propranolol, and timolol.19 Outcomes with atenolol appear to 
be inferior compared with other antihypertensive 
drugs in the treatment of hypertension.34 When 
beta blockers, ACE inhibitors, and ARB therapies 
do not sufficiently control BP, additional GDMT 
BP-lowering therapies can be added, including 
thiazide diuretics, CCB, and mineralocorticoid 
receptor antagonists.19
4.2.8. SGLT2 Inhibitors and GLP-1 Receptor 
Agonists
Recommendations for Use of SGLT2 Inhibitors and GLP-1 Receptor 
Agonists
Referenced studies that support the recommendations are  
summarized in the Online Data Supplement. 
COR LOE Recommendations 
1 A 1. In patients with CCD who have type 2 diabetes, 
the use of either an SGL T2 inhibitor1–8 or a 
GLP-1 receptor agonist9–17 with proven cardio-
vascular benefit is recommended to reduce the 
risk of MACE.
Cost Value 
Statement: 
High ValueB-NR 2. In patients with CCD and type 2 diabetes, addi-
tion of a GLP-1 receptor agonist at US prices 
is projected to be of high value compared with 
standard of care.18Table 12. Nonpharmacologic Strategies for Blood Pressure Management*
Approximate Impact on SBP 
Nonpharmacologic  
Intervention Dose Hypertension Normotension Reference 
Weight loss Weight/body fat Best goal is ideal body weight but aim for at least 
a 1-kg reduction in body weight for most adults 
who are overweight. Expect about 1 mm Hg for 
every 1-kg reduction in body weight.−5 mm Hg −2/3 mm Hg 5
Healthy diet DASH dietary pattern Consume a diet rich in fruits, vegetables, whole 
grains, and low-fat dairy products, with reduced 
content of saturated and total fat.−11 mm Hg −3 mm Hg 2,3
Reduced intake of  
dietary sodiumDietary sodium Optimal goal is <1500 mg/d but aim for at least  
a 1000-mg/d reduction in most adults.−5/6 mm Hg −2/3 mm Hg 29,30
Enhanced intake of  
dietary potassiumDietary potassium Aim for 3500–5000 mg/d, preferably by  
consumption of a diet rich in potassium.−4/5 mm Hg −2 mm Hg 35
Physical activity Aerobic 90–150 min/wk
65%–75% heart rate reserve−5/8 mm Hg −2/4 mm Hg 4,8
Dynamic resistance 90–150 min/wk
50%–80% of 1 repetition maximum
6 exercises, 3 sets/exercise, 10 repetitions/set−4 mm Hg −2 mm Hg 4
Isometric resistance 4×2 min (hand grip), 1 min rest between exer-
cises, 30%–40% maximum voluntary contraction, 
3 sessions/wk
8–10 wk−5 mm Hg −4 mm Hg 36,37
Moderation in alcohol 
intakeAlcohol  
consumptionIn individuals who drink alcohol, limit alcohol† to: 
Men: ≤2 drinks daily
Women: ≤1 drink daily−4 mm Hg −3 mm Hg 6
Resources: Your Guide to Lowering Your Blood Pressure With DASH—How Do I Make the DASH?38 Available at: https://www.nhlbi.nih.gov/files/docs/public/heart/
new_dash.pdf.
*T ype, dose, and expected impact on BP in adults with a normal BP and with hypertension.
†In the United States, 1 “standard” drink contains roughly 14 g of pure alcohol, which is typically found in 12 oz of regular beer (usually about 5% alcohol), 5 oz of 
wine (usually about 12% alcohol), and 1.5 oz of distilled spirits (usually about 40% alcohol).
DASH indicates Dietary Approaches to Stop Hypertension; and SBP, systolic blood pressure.
Modified with permission from Whelton PK, et al.19 Copyright 2018 American Heart Association, Inc., and American College of Cardiology Foundation.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on November 12, 2025

CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINESAugust 29, 2023 Circulation. 2023;148:e9–e119. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000001168
Virani et al 2023 AHA/ACC/ACCP/ASPC/NLA/PCNA Chronic Coronary Disease Guideline e44Cost Value 
Statement: 
Intermedi-
ate ValueB-NR 3. In patients with CCD and type 2 diabetes, 
addition of an SGL T2 inhibitor at US prices is 
projected to be of intermediate value compared 
with standard of care.18
1 A 4. In patients with CCD and heart failure with 
L VEF ≤40%, use of an SGL T2 inhibitor is rec-
ommended to reduce the risk of cardiovascular 
death and heart failure hospitalization19–22 and 
to improve QOL,23,24 irrespective of diabetes 
status.*
Cost Value 
Statement: 
Intermedi-
ate ValueB-NR 5. In patients with CCD and heart failure with 
L VEF ≤40%, addition of an SGL T2 inhibitor 
to GDMT, irrespective of diabetes status, is 
projected to be of intermediate value at US 
prices.25,26
2a B-R 6. In patients with CCD and heart failure with 
L VEF >40%, use of an SGL T2 inhibitor can 
be beneficial in decreasing heart failure 
hospitalizations27 ,28 and to improve QOL,4,29 
irrespective of diabetes status.
Cost Value 
Statement: 
Intermedi-
ate ValueB-NR 7 . In patients with CCD and heart failure with 
L VEF >40%, addition of an SGL T2 inhibitor to 
GDMT, irrespective of diabetes status, is pro-
jected to be of uncertain value at US prices.30
*Modified from the 2022 AHA/ACC/HFSA Guideline for the Management of 
Heart Failure.31
Synopsis
Comprehensive cardiovascular risk reduction strategies 
are effective in patients with CCD and type 2 diabetes.32 
Despite these efforts, cardiovascular event rates remain 
high among patients with type 2 diabetes, even among 
well-managed patients,1,10,33 and CAD remains the lead-
ing cause of morbidity and death.34 Two classes of glu-
cose-lowering medications (SGL T2 inhibitors and GLP-1 
receptor agonists) have potent cardiovascular benefits, 
independent of their effects on glycemic control.1,3,4,9,10,13 
Both medications improve glycemic control, facilitate 
weight loss, reduce progression of kidney disease, and 
reduce the risk of cardiovascular events through distinct 
pathways. Y et their adoption in clinical practice has been 
slow,35,36 highlighting an opportunity for cardiovascular 
specialists to have a greater collaborative role in the care 
of patients with CCD and type 2 diabetes.37
Comprehensive risk factor control should include 
lifestyle modifications38 and GDMT to optimize dyslipid-
emia (Section 4.2.6, “Lipid Management”), hypertension 
(Section 4.2.7 , “Blood Pressure Management”), weight 
management (Section 4.2.9), nutrition (Section 4.2.1), 
physical activity (Section 4.2.11), and hyperglycemia.39 
Regarding glucose control, the American Diabetes Asso-
ciation recommends a hemoglobin A1C goal of <7%40 
and a more conservative glycemic target (eg, hemoglobin 
A1c <8% or 8.5%) for those older (>65 years of age) 
with CCD and type 2 diabetes or comorbidities,41 to limit 
the risk of hypoglycemia.40–48 Among patients with CCD and type 2 diabetes, a patient-centered approach (Sec-
tion 4.1.1, “Team-Based Approach”) should guide shared 
decision-making (Section 4.1.3) about glycemic targets 
and the decision to initiate an SGL T-2 inhibitor, GLP-1 
receptor agonist, or both.39
Recommendation-Specific Supportive Text
 1. In patients with CCD and type 2 diabetes, both 
SGL T2 inhibitors and GLP-1 receptor agonists sig-
nificantly reduce the risk of MACE, with additional 
benefits in terms of weight loss49 and progression 
of kidney disease.7 ,16,17 SGL T2 inhibitors do not 
appear to primarily reduce atherosclerosis as much 
as they reduce incident and worsening HF (for 
which patients with CCD and type 2 diabetes who 
are at risk).1–8 In contrast, GLP-1 receptor agonists 
appear to primarily reduce the risk of atheroscle-
rotic events, such as MI and stroke. Although there 
has been some inconsistency across the cardio-
vascular outcomes trials,9–15 meta-analyses have 
shown no statistically significant heterogeneity 
in cardiovascular risk reduction across different 
GLP-1 receptor agonists.16,17 Currently, no com-
pelling evidence is available that either medication 
reduces cardiovascular risk in patients with CCD 
but without type 2 diabetes,50,51 or in the case of 
SGL T2 inhibitors, without concomitant HF. Given 
their distinct mechanisms, the cardiovascular risk 
reduction may be greater using both classes of 
medications compared with either medication 
alone. Data on concurrent use are mostly limited 
to safety and metabolic endpoints,52 but available 
studies showed benefit in BP and weight reduc-
tion with dual therapy.53,54 Whether the effects on 
cardiovascular outcomes are additive, or even syn-
ergistic, is not yet known.
 2. In a systematic review of cost-effectiveness analy-
ses examining the addition of GLP-1 agonists 
compared with alternative therapies (including 
insulin or other classes of diabetes medications) 
among patients with diabetes, the use of a GLP-1 
agonist is projected to be of high value (cost-
saving or incremental cost-effectiveness ratio of 
<$50 000 per QAL Y gained).18 Although these 
analyses were performed in all patients with type 
2 diabetes rather than specifically in patients with 
CCD, these results appear to be robust to a range 
of assumptions regarding underlying risk and are 
likely applicable to patients with CCD.
 3. In a systematic review of cost-effectiveness analy-
ses examining the addition of SGL T2 inhibitors to 
standard of care among patients with diabetes, 
the use of an SGL T2 inhibitor is projected to be 
of intermediate value ($50 000 to <$150 000 per 
QAL Y gained) compared with standard of care.18 As Recommendations for Use of SGLT2 Inhibitors and GLP-1 Receptor 
Agonists (Continued )
COR LOE Recommendations 
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on November 12, 2025

CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINESCirculation. 2023;148:e9–e119. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000001168 August 29, 2023
Virani et al 2023 AHA/ACC/ACCP/ASPC/NLA/PCNA Chronic Coronary Disease Guideline e45noted previously, these analyses were performed in 
all patients with type 2 diabetes rather than specifi-
cally in patients with CCD, but these results appear 
to be robust to a range of assumptions regarding 
underlying risk and are likely applicable to patients 
with CCD.
 4. Among patients with HF with reduced ejection frac-
tion (with or without type 2 diabetes), SGL T2 inhibi-
tors reduce the risk of cardiovascular death and HF 
hospitalization19–22 and improve functional capacity 
and QOL.23,24 These effects were independent of 
cause of cardiomyopathy, because approximately 
half of enrolled patients across the trials had CCD. 
SGL T2 inhibitors should be avoided or used with 
caution in patients with type 1 diabetes or with 
advanced CKD (eg, eGFR <30 mL/min/1.73 m2).
 5. Among patients with HF with reduced ejection frac-
tion (with or without type 2 diabetes), the use of 
SGL T2 inhibitors is projected to be of intermediate 
value ($50 000 to <$150 000 per QAL Y gained) 
from a US health care sector perspective and a 
lifetime horizon. One modeling-based study com-
pared dapagliflozin and GDMT with GDMT alone in 
a hypothetical cohort of adults in the United States 
with similar clinical characteristics as participants 
of the DAPA-HF (Dapagliflozin in Patients with 
Heart Failure and Reduced Ejection Fraction) trial.25 
Assuming the cost of dapagliflozin to be $4192 
annually, dapagliflozin was projected to add 0.63 
(95% uncertainty interval, 0.25-1.15) QAL Ys at an 
incremental lifetime cost of $42 800 (95% uncer-
tainty interval, $37 100-$50 300), for an incre-
mental cost-effectiveness ratio of $68 300 per 
QAL Y gained (95% uncertainty interval, $54 600-
$117 600 per QAL Y gained; cost-effective in 
94% of probabilistic simulations at a threshold 
of $100 000 per QAL Y gained).25 Findings were 
similar among individuals with or without diabetes 
but were sensitive to drug cost. Similar findings 
were independently reported by another group of 
investigators.26
 6. Among patients with HF with preserved ejec-
tion fraction (with or without type 2 diabetes), 
SGL T2 inhibitors reduced the risk of HF hospital-
ization or cardiovascular death in the EMPEROR-
PRESERVED (Evaluation of the effects of 
sodium-glucose co-transporter 2 inhibition with 
empagliflozin on morbidity and mortality in patients 
with chronic heart failure and a preserved ejec-
tion fraction) trial27 and the risk of worsening 
HF or cardiovascular death in the DELIVER trial 
(Dapagliflozin Evaluation to Improve the Lives of 
Patients with Preserved Ejection Fraction Heart 
Failure), with the primary endpoints driven by signifi-
cant reductions in HF hospitalization in both trials. 
SGL T2 inhibitors also improved functional capacity and QOL in the PRESERVED-HF and DELIVER 
trials.28,29 CCD was diagnosed in 35% of enrolled 
patients in EMPORER-PRESERVED and 20% of 
enrolled patients in PRESERVED-HF (Effects of 
Dapagliflozin on Symptoms and Functional Status in 
Patients with Heart Failure and Preserved Ejection 
Fraction), with no significant difference in risk of HF 
hospitalization (subgroup was not tested in the QOL 
study); the CCD rate was not reported in DELIVER.
 7 . Among patients with HF with preserved ejection frac-
tion (with or without type 2 diabetes), the economic 
value of SGL T2 inhibitors is sensitive to the effect 
of SGL T2 inhibitors on cardiovascular mortality. The 
reduction in cardiovascular mortality was not statis-
tically significant in the EMPEROR-PRESERVED 
or DELIVER trials, or in a pooled analysis of the 2 
trials. If one were to assume no reduction in car-
diovascular mortality and minimal improvement in 
QOL among patients with HF with preserved ejec-
tion fraction, the use of empagliflozin is of low value 
(incremental cost-effectiveness ratio $437 000).30 
However, if one were to assume a 9% reduction 
in cardiovascular mortality (as consistent with the 
point-estimate of EMPEROR-PRESERVED), the 
incremental cost-effectiveness ratio is lowered to  
$174 000 (which the authors defined as intermedi-
ate value after adjusting the ACC/AHA thresholds 
for interval change in per capita GDP). Although 
the trials included patients with and without CCD, 
it is likely that patients with CCD have a higher 
risk of events (including cardiovascular mortality) 
and therefore derive a larger-than-average ben-
efit from SGL T2 inhibitors. Additional clinical stud-
ies that examine the effect of SGL T2 inhibitors on 
cardiovascular and noncardiovascular mortality, and 
additional economic evaluations that synthesize the 
available clinical evidence and consider a range of 
costs and risks, are needed to ascertain the value of 
SGL T2 inhibitors in patients with CCD and HF with 
preserved ejection fraction.
4.2.9. Weight Management
Recommendations for Weight Management
Referenced studies that support the recommendations are  
summarized in the Online Data Supplement. 
COR LOE Recommendations 
1 C-EO 1. In patients with CCD, assessment of BMI with or 
without waist circumference is recommended dur-
ing routine clinical follow-up.1–6
1 B-NR 2. Patients with CCD and overweight or obesity 
should receive counseling on diet, lifestyle, and 
goals for weight loss.7–10
2a B-R 3. For patients with CCD and overweight or obesity 
in whom pharmacologic therapy is warranted for 
further weight reduction, a GLP-1 receptor agonist 
can be beneficial in addition to counseling for diet 
and physical activity,11,12 and it is reasonable to 
choose semaglutide over liraglutide.13,14
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on November 12, 2025

CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINESAugust 29, 2023 Circulation. 2023;148:e9–e119. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000001168
Virani et al 2023 AHA/ACC/ACCP/ASPC/NLA/PCNA Chronic Coronary Disease Guideline e462a B-NR 4. In patients with CCD and severe obesity who  
have not met weight loss goals with lifestyle and 
pharmacologic intervention, and who have  
acceptable surgical risk, referral for consideration 
of a bariatric procedure is reasonable for weight 
loss and cardiovascular risk factor reduction.15–18
3: Harm B-R 5. In patients with CCD, use of sympathomimetic 
weight loss drugs is potentially harmful.19
Synopsis
Compared with individuals with normal weight, patients 
with obesity experience CCD events at an earlier age, 
live with CCD for a greater proportion of their lifetime, 
and have a shorter average life span.6,20 Excess adipos-
ity accelerates atherosclerosis and promotes adverse 
changes in cardiac function through deleterious ef-
fects on the myocardium as well as the vasculature and 
through obesity-related comorbidities, including hyper-
tension, dyslipidemia and type 2 diabetes.21–23 Although 
BMI can be a heterogeneous marker of individual risk, 
increasing BMI is associated with increasing risk of mor-
bidity and death across populations, and BMI thresholds 
continue to guide clinical diagnosis and management of 
overweight and obesity (“2013 AHA/ACC Guideline for 
the Management of Overweight and Obesity in Adults”).24 
The general goals of weight loss and management are to: 
(1) prevent further weight gain, (2) reduce body weight, 
and (3) maintain a lower body weight over the long term. 
Weight loss in association with lifestyle modification (see 
Section 4.2.1, “Nutrition,” Section 4.2.11, “Physical Activ-
ity,” and Section 4.1.4 “Social Determinants of Health”) 
and select pharmacologic interventions (see Section 
4.2.8, “SGL T2 Inhibitors and GLP-1 Receptor Agonists”) 
and surgical interventions for eligible patients with CCD 
improves metabolic and hemodynamic risk profiles, with 
potential for improved cardiovascular outcomes.Recommendation-Specific Supportive Text
 1. Patients with CCD should undergo routine mea-
surement of BMI with or without waist circum-
ference for initial evaluation and as a guide to 
efficacy of weight loss intervention.1–6 Although 
not a measure of body composition, BMI remains 
the most practical way to evaluate for overweight 
and obesity, defined as a BMI 25 to 29.9 kg/m2 
and ≥30 kg/m2, respectively.24 Waist circumfer-
ence, a surrogate estimate of visceral adiposity, 
may be a better indicator of risk than BMI in some 
patients and populations,25,26 with central obesity 
defined as a waist circumference >102 cm (40 
in) in men and >88 cm (35 in) in women.24 As 
with BMI, racial and ethnic differences in waist 
circumference thresholds associated with cardio-
metabolic risk have been reported.27 Recognizing 
that weight assessment in some individuals may 
represent a deterrent to seeking care, gender- 
and culturally sensitive approaches to assessing 
weight are recommended in all patients, with an 
option for patients to self-report values where 
appropriate.
 2. Lifestyle modification (see Section 4.2.1, “Nutrition” 
and Section 4.2.11, “Physical Activity”) with asso-
ciated weight loss improves obesity-related CCD 
comorbidities. With lifestyle measures alone, a 
weight loss of 5% to 7% of body weight is typi-
cal but often difficult to sustain. Multicomponent 
interventions including dietary modification, exer-
cise, and behavioral counseling are more effective 
than interventions targeting single components.7, 8 
A meta-analysis of 122 RCTs and 2 observa-
tional studies compared an intensive, multicom-
ponent behavior-based weight loss intervention 
with a comparison group receiving usual care. At 
12 to 18 months, patients receiving multicom-
ponent behavior-based interventions were more 
likely to achieve a ≥ 5% weight loss (relative risk, 
1.94 [95% CI, 1.70-2.22]).7 In patients with CCD, 
regular physical activity with increased lean mass 
may be more important for improving survival than 
achieving a normal BMI.10 Patients with CCD 
and overweight or obesity should be counseled 
to lose weight, especially if accomplished with 
increases in physical activity and improvements in  
cardiorespiratory fitness.9
 3. Candidates for weight-loss drug therapy include 
individuals with a BMI ≥ 30 kg/m2 or a BMI of 27 to 
29.9 kg/m2 with weight-related comorbidities who 
have not met weight-loss goals (eg, loss of ≥ 5% 
of total body weight at 3–6 months) with a com-
prehensive lifestyle intervention alone. The deci-
sion to initiate drug therapy in patients with CCD 
should be individualized, considering associated Recommendations for Weight Management (Continued )
COR LOE Recommendations 
Table 13. Core Components of CR18
Patient assessment
Nutritional counseling
Weight management
Blood pressure management
Lipid management
Diabetes management
Tobacco cessation
Psychosocial management
Physical activity counseling
Exercise training
CR indicates cardiac rehabilitation.
Modified with permission from Balady GJ, et al. Copyright 2007 American 
Heart Association, Inc.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on November 12, 2025

CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINESCirculation. 2023;148:e9–e119. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000001168 August 29, 2023
Virani et al 2023 AHA/ACC/ACCP/ASPC/NLA/PCNA Chronic Coronary Disease Guideline e47risks and benefits. The cardiovascular safety of 
certain weight-loss drugs, such as naltrexone/
bupropion, has not been established and remains 
controversial.28 Use of a GLP-1 receptor agonist 
(Section 4.2.8) is beneficial when pharmacologic 
therapy is warranted for further weight reduc-
tion.11,12,14 Among eligible adults without diabe-
tes, the STEP 8 (Semaglutide Treatment Effect in 
Patients with Obesity) randomized controlled trial 
(N=338, 3.3% with known CCD) found that once-
weekly subcutaneous semaglutide 2.4 mg added to 
counseling for diet and physical activity resulted in 
significantly greater weight loss at week 68 com-
pared with once-daily subcutaneous liraglutide 
3.0 mg or placebo (mean weight change, –15.8% 
[95% CI, –17 .6 to –13.9] versus –6.4% [95% CI, 
–8.2 to –4.6] versus –1.9% [95% CI, –4.0 to 0.2] 
for semaglutide versus liraglutide versus placebo, 
respectively).13 Both semaglutide (0.5–1.0 mg 
weekly) and liraglutide (1.2–1.8 mg daily) were 
associated with reduced MACE in patients with 
type 2 diabetes and CCD.29,30 Recently, the double-
blind randomized controlled trial SURMOUNT-1 (A 
Study of Tirzepatide [L Y3298176] in Participants 
with Obesity or Overweight) also showed a dose-
dependent weight loss benefit (mean weight 
change up to –20.9% [95% CI, –21.8 to –19.9]) 
with once-weekly subcutaneous tirzepatide (at 5 
mg, 10 mg, or 15 mg) relative to placebo in eligible 
obese adults without diabetes (N=2539, 3.1% with 
ASCVD) over 72 weeks.31
 4. Patients with CCD and severe obesity (BMI ≥ 40 
kg/m2 or BMI 35-39.9 kg/m2 with a weight-
related comorbidity) who have not met weight 
loss goals with lifestyle and pharmacologic inter-
vention may benefit from a bariatric procedure 
such as gastric bypass surgery. Bariatric proce-
dures appear to be relatively safe and effective 
among patients with CCD, at least in those <65 
years of age.15,17 ,18 In the nonrandomized pro-
spective SOS (Swedish Obese Subjects) study, 
bariatric surgery was associated with preven-
tion of type 2 diabetes and fewer cardiovascu-
lar deaths and lower incidence of MI or stroke 
compared with matched obese controls (hazard 
ratio, 0.47 [95% CI, 0.29-0.76] for death, and 
hazard ratio, 0.67 [95% CI, 0.54-0.83] for MI 
or stroke).16,32 These benefits do not appear 
to occur with liposuction, suggesting that the 
negative energy balance associated with bar-
iatric intervention may be necessary for achiev-
ing the metabolic benefits of weight loss.33 
Specifically among patients with obesity and 
type 2 diabetes, bariatric surgery is an effec-
tive strategy for achieving weight loss, glyce-
mic control, and reducing cardiovascular risk factors.34 More recently, 2 retrospective obser-
vational studies of patients with CCD showed 
significant reductions in MACE among those 
undergoing bariatric surgery compared with 
matched controls.17 ,18
 5. Sympathomimetic drugs (eg, phentermine, dieth-
ylproprion, benzphetamine, phendimetrazine) can 
increase heart rate and BP and are not recom-
mended in patients with CCD. In a trial of sibutra-
mine versus placebo in >10 000 patients with or 
at high risk for CCD, sibutramine was associated 
with a higher risk of nonfatal MI (4.1% versus 
3.2%; hazard ratio, 1.28 [95% CI, 1.04-1.57]) and 
nonfatal stroke (2.6% versus 1.9%; hazard ratio, 
1.36 [95% CI, 1.04-1.77]).19 As a result, the FDA 
removed sibutramine from the US market in 2010, 
but it can still be found illicitly in dietary supple-
ments marketed for weight loss and in other parts 
of the world.35 Clinicians are encouraged to ask 
patients about potential use of dietary supple-
ments for weight management.
4.2.10. Cardiac Rehabilitation
Recommendation for Cardiac Rehabilitation
Referenced studies that support the recommendation are summarized 
in the Online Data Supplement. 
COR LOE Recommendation 
1A*  1. All patients with CCD and appropriate  
indications*†‡ should be referred to a cardiac 
rehabilitation program to improve outcomes.1–3 B-R†
C-LD‡
*After recent MI, PCI, or CABG.1–5
†With stable angina2,3,6,7 or after heart transplant.8–13
‡After recent spontaneous coronary artery dissection event.14–17
Synopsis
CR is a comprehensive, team-based, and evidence-
based approach to delivering lifestyle, behavioral, and 
medical therapies of known benefit to individuals with 
CVD.18–23 Because of underutilization of CR,24 novel 
delivery models have been and continue to be devel-
oped, tested, and implemented, including home-based, 
remote CR services.25 Home-based CR have similar 
shorter-term safety and clinical outcomes as facility-
based CR and can be considered as an alternative 
option for patients who cannot attend facility-based 
CR.26–29 This is of particular importance for patients with 
limited option for center-based CR, such as those living 
in rural settings and other areas with limited number of 
CR centers. In whatever delivery model CR is provided, 
the multidisciplinary CR team develops and applies 
patient-centered care based on specific core com-
ponents (Table 13), including recovery and recupera-
tion strategies, quality improvement, and adherence 
to lifestyle and medication therapies.18,30,31 Key ben-
efits from CR have been noted to be dose-related.32,33  
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on November 12, 2025

CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINESAugust 29, 2023 Circulation. 2023;148:e9–e119. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000001168
Virani et al 2023 AHA/ACC/ACCP/ASPC/NLA/PCNA Chronic Coronary Disease Guideline e48Published evidence suggests favorable cost-effective-
ness of CR.34–36 One multicenter, randomized trial of 
longer-term “maintenance” CR of up to 3 years was 
associated with moderate but significant improvements 
in cardiovascular outcomes compared with those who 
participated in the traditional 12-week course of CR.37 
For related information, refer to these Sections: 3.2, 
“Risk Stratification and Relationship to Treatment Se-
lection”; 4.1.1, “Team-Based Approach”; 4.1.2, “Pa-
tient Education,” 4.1.3, “Shared Decision-Making”; 
4.2.1, “Nutrition, Including Supplements”; 4.2.2, “Men-
tal Health”; 4.2.6, “Lipid Management”; 4.2.7 , “Blood 
Pressure Management”; 4.2.8, “Sodium Glucose Co-
transporter 2 Inhibitors and Glucagon-Like Peptide-1 
Receptor Agonists”; 4.2.9, “Weight Management”; 6.1, 
“Existing Heart Diseases and Conditions”; 6.9, “Post-
Heart Transplant Cardiac Allograft Vasculopathy”; and 
2022 ACC/AHA/HFSA heart failure guideline.38
Recommendation-Specific Supportive Text
 1. Patients with CCD with a recent MI, PCI, or CABG 
procedure who participate in CR have significantly 
better outcomes compared with those who do not 
participate,39–41 including lower all-cause and cardio-
vascular mortality rates,27 ,41,42 lower rehospitalization 
rates (total, cardiovascular, and noncardiovascu-
lar),43–45 and superior QOL.27 ,41,42,44,45 Participation in 
CR appears to improve symptom control, functional 
capacity, and QOL in patients with stable angina.2,40
    CR is also associated with improved outcomes in 
special populations with CCD. CR improves exercise 
capacity in heart transplant recipients,8 including 
those in maintenance (1–8 years after heart trans-
plant) as well as de novo (7–16 weeks after heart 
transplant).9,10 In maintenance of patients with heart 
transplant with or without cardiac allograft vascu-
lopathy, high-intensity interval training versus usual 
care resulted in significantly lower rates of cardiac 
allograft vasculopathy progression at 1 year,11 but 
these effects were no longer present on long-term 
(3–5 years) follow-up, suggesting that continued 
intermittent periods of high-intensity interval train-
ing may be necessary to maintain the initial ben-
efits.12,46,47 One observational study showed an 
association between the dose of CR sessions and 
survival in patients with heart transplant.48
    Similarly, patients with spontaneous coronary 
artery dissection (SCAD) who participated in 
CR, compared with those who did not, had lower 
MACE and lower rates of recurrent MI with favor-
able trends in physical, emotional, and mental 
domains.14–17 For patients with CCD and concomi-
tant HF, CR is also recommended as a Class 2a 
recommendation, LOE B-NR (see 2022 ACC/
AHA/HFSA heart failure guideline).384.2.11. Physical Activity
Recommendations for Physical Activity
Referenced studies that support the recommendations are  
summarized in the Online Data Supplement. 
COR LOE Recommendations 
1 A 1. For patients with CCD who do not have contrain-
dications, an exercise regimen is recommended, 
including ≥150 minutes/wk of moderate-intensity 
aerobic activities or ≥75 minutes/wk of higher-
intensity aerobic activities to improve functional 
capacity and QOL, and to reduce hospital admis-
sion and mortality rates.1–3
1 B-R 2. For patients with CCD who do not have contraindi-
cations, resistance (strength) training exercises are 
recommended on ≥2 days/wk to improve muscle 
strength, functional capacity, and cardiovascular 
risk factor control.4–6
2a B-NR 3. For patients with CCD who do not have contra-
indications, lower-intensity lifestyle activities (eg, 
walking breaks at work) to reduce sedentary 
behavior (ie, sitting time) are reasonable to improve 
functional capacity and reduce cardiovascular risk, 
especially in individuals with low levels of habitual 
leisure time physical activity.7–9
Synopsis
Habitual physical activities—including nonexercise life-
style activities, aerobic (cardiovascular) exercise train-
ing, and resistance (strength) training—are associated 
with improved outcomes in individuals with CVD, includ-
ing functional capacity, QOL, and mortality and morbid-
ity rates.1–9 Moving individuals from sedentary lifestyle 
habits to at least lower-intensity physical activities can 
improve metabolic and cardiovascular health.9–11 Health 
benefits occur even with lower doses (eg, frequency, du-
ration, and intensity) of physical activity and increase with 
increasing doses of physical activity.7 Mechanisms of the 
benefits from physical activity and exercise training in-
clude antiatherosclerotic, antiarrhythmic, antithrombotic, 
anti-ischemic, and antidepressant effects.12
Exercise is contraindicated in patients with severe, life-
threatening, and unstable conditions. Contraindications 
include unstable angina, other high risk cardiovascular 
conditions (eg, high-grade arrhythmias, decompensated 
heart failure, active thromboembolic disease), or other 
unstable or life-threatening noncardiovascular conditions 
such as active infection, uncontrolled diabetes, end-stage 
cancer, or unstable psychological issues.
Recommendation-Specific Supportive Text
 1. Moderate-to-higher intensity exercise training in 
individuals with CCD, which is done in CR pro-
grams, improves functional capacity, health-related 
QOL, cardiovascular risk factor control, and mortal-
ity rates.2,3,13,14 In addition to continuous, moderate-
intensity exercise training, high-intensity interval 
training also appears to be an effective and safe 
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on November 12, 2025

CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINESCirculation. 2023;148:e9–e119. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000001168 August 29, 2023
Virani et al 2023 AHA/ACC/ACCP/ASPC/NLA/PCNA Chronic Coronary Disease Guideline e49approach to aerobic exercise training in individu-
als with CCD.15,16 US guidelines recommend that 
adults who do not have contraindications to exer-
cise should do at least 150 to 300 minutes per 
week of moderate-intensity aerobic physical activ-
ity, or at least 75 to 150 minutes per week of vig-
orous (higher)-intensity aerobic physical activity, or 
an equivalent combination of moderate- and vigor-
ous-intensity aerobic activity.
 2. Muscle-strengthening (resistance training) activi-
ties are recommended on ≥2 days a week.17 
Resistance training to safely improve muscular 
strength improves functional capacity and QOL.5,6,18 
Resistance training may also reduce mortality rates 
in individuals with CCD.19
 3. Compared with a sedentary lifestyle, lower-inten-
sity lifestyle activities (eg, gardening), office-based 
physical activities, and climbing stairs improve 
energy expenditure, functional capacity, and car-
diometabolic risk, especially in previously seden-
tary individuals who are not exercising on a regular 
basis.20–25 Interventions, such as the use of step 
counters and walking prompts, may be helpful in 
decreasing sedentary time and increasing lifestyle 
activities in individuals with CCD.9-11,20-23,26
4.2.12. Environmental Exposures
Recommendations for Environmental Exposures
Referenced studies that support the recommendations are  
summarized in the Online Data Supplement. 
COR LOE Recommendations 
2a B-NR 1. In patients with CCD, minimization of exposure to 
ambient air pollution is reasonable to reduce the 
risk of cardiovascular events.1–7
2b B-NR 2. In patients with CCD, minimization of  
climate-related exposures (eg, extreme  
temperatures, wildfire smoke) may be reasonable 
to reduce the risk of cardiovascular events.8–10
Synopsis
Adverse environmental exposures such as air pollution, 
extremes of ambient temperature, and excess noise 
should be systematically assessed in patients with CCD. 
Numerous ecological studies have examined the ad-
verse effect on cardiovascular health of ambient air pol-
lution such as that produced by transportation exhaust 
or wildfire smoke.1-7 ,11,12 Exposure to extreme heat or 
extreme cold ambient temperatures has been associ-
ated with increased cardiovascular events among pa-
tients with CCD.8-10,13,14 As extreme temperatures have 
become increasingly frequent, clinicians should identify 
at-risk individuals, provide guidance regarding medica-
tion titration (eg, loop diuretics) during extreme temper-
ature events, and encourage the use of publicly available 
controlled-temperature environments during extreme 
weather events. Numerous observational studies docu-
ment a connection between excess environmental noise and the progression of CCD,15,16 but data are limited re-
garding the benefit of noise reduction devices. Adverse 
environmental exposures disproportionately affect ra-
cial and ethnic minority populations and individuals of 
low socioeconomic status; therefore, they contribute 
to inequitable health outcomes.17 ,18 Policy interventions 
that reduce the burden of these exposures or provide 
resources to mitigate their adverse effects may reduce 
health disparities.18
Recommendation-Specific Supportive Text
 1. Ambient air pollution, especially small particulate 
matter with an aerodynamic diameter ≤ 2.5 microns 
(also referred to as “PM2.5”), is associated with 
worse cardiovascular outcomes.1–7 Most outdoor 
and indoor PM2.5 pollutants are produced by com-
bustion (eg, car engines, coal- or natural gas-fired 
power plants, woodstoves, or wildfires). Proximity to 
automobile traffic or fossil fuel-dependent industries 
and use of poorly ventilated stoves are key predic-
tors of exposure to increased PM2.5 levels. Long-
term exposure to PM2.5 levels >10 micrograms 
per cubic meter (μg/m3) is associated with a >10% 
increase in the odds of having CCD, progression of 
CCD, and suffering an acute MI or cardiovascular 
mortality.1–5 Even short-term exposure (<7 days) to 
elevated levels is associated with increased hos-
pitalization and cardiovascular death.6,7 There are 
insufficient data to support regular use of in-home 
high-efficiency air purifiers or N95 filters to improve 
cardiovascular outcomes.19 Other pollutants, such 
as ground-level ozone, are associated with a small 
increase in risk of cardiovascular death, but addi-
tional studies are needed to quantify the magnitude 
of risk.20 Information regarding air pollutants and 
their relation to air quality in a specific geography 
can be found via the US Environmental Protection 
Agency at AirNow.gov .21
 2. Exposure to extreme ambient heat or several con-
secutive days of extreme heat (“heat wave”) is 
associated with increased death from ischemic 
heart disease.8 Older adults, individuals with out-
door jobs, and patients receiving certain medi-
cations such as loop diuretics are at increased 
risk.8,9 The effects of extreme heat are exacer-
bated in urban areas because of the “urban heat 
island effect,” wherein dense concentrations of 
pavement and buildings absorb and retain heat.13 
Individualized assessment should include risk of 
exposure (ie, regional temperature and occupa-
tional exposure), clinical susceptibility (ie, age, 
comorbidities, and medications used), and capac-
ity for adaptation (ie, cognitive skills, housing 
quality, and community resources).14 Similarly, 
exposure to wildfire smoke has been associ-
ated with increased hospitalizations for acute 
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on November 12, 2025

CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINESAugust 29, 2023 Circulation. 2023;148:e9–e119. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000001168
Virani et al 2023 AHA/ACC/ACCP/ASPC/NLA/PCNA Chronic Coronary Disease Guideline e50MI, ischemic heart disease, and cardiac arrest.12 
Wildfire smoke can be carried long distances, 
exposing individuals thousands of miles from the 
source.11 The population health impact of wild-
fires is projected to increase in the coming years 
because of climate change–related increases in 
temperature and changes in precipitation pat-
terns, as well as increased human habitation in 
wildland-urban interfaces.22 Minimizing exposure 
to these environmental extremes may improve 
outcomes for individuals with CCD.
4.3. Medical Therapy to Prevent Cardiovascular 
Events and Manage Symptoms
4.3.1. Antiplatelet Therapy and Oral Anticoagulants
Recommendations for Antiplatelet Therapy and Oral Anticoagulants
Referenced studies that support the recommendations are  
summarized in the Online Data Supplements. 
COR LOE Recommendations 
Antiplatelet Therapy Without Oral Anticoagulants
1 A 1. In patients with CCD and no indication for oral  
anticoagulant therapy, low-dose aspirin 81 mg  
(75-100 mg) is recommended to reduce  
atherosclerotic events.*1–3
1 A 2. In patients with CCD treated with PCI, dual  
antiplatelet therapy (DAPT) consisting of aspirin 
and clopidogrel for 6 months post PCI followed by 
single antiplatelet therapy (SAPT) is indicated to 
reduce MACE and bleeding events.*4–7
2a A 3. In select patients with CCD treated with PCI and 
a drug-eluting stent (DES) who have completed 
a 1- to 3-month course of DAPT, P2Y12 inhibitor 
monotherapy for at least 12 months is reasonable 
to reduce bleeding risk.8–12
2b A 4. In patients with CCD who have had a previous 
MI and are at low bleeding risk, extended DAPT 
beyond 12 months for a period of up to 3 years 
may be reasonable to reduce MACE.*13,14
2b B-R 5. In patients with CCD and a previous history of 
MI without a history of stroke, transient ischemic 
attack (TIA), or ICH, vorapaxar may be added to 
aspirin therapy to reduce MACE.15–17
2b B-R 6. In patients with CCD, the use of DAPT after CABG 
may be useful to reduce the incidence of  
saphenous vein graft occlusion.18
3: No 
benefitA 7 . In patients with CCD without recent ACS or a  
PCI-related indication for DAPT, the addition of 
clopidogrel to aspirin therapy is not useful to 
reduce MACE.*19
3: Harm A 8. In patients with CCD and previous stroke, TIA, 
or ICH, vorapaxar should not be added to DAPT 
because of increased risk of major bleeding and 
ICH.15,20
3: Harm B-R 9. In patients with CCD and previous stroke, TIA, or 
ICH, prasugrel should not be used because of risk 
of significant or fatal bleeding.21
3: Harm B-R10. In patients with CCD, chronic nonsteroidal  
anti-inflammatory drugs should not be used 
because of increased cardiovascular and bleeding 
complications.*22Antiplatelet Therapy With Direct Oral Anticoagulant (DOAC)
1 B-R11. In patients with CCD who have undergone elective 
PCI and who require oral anticoagulant therapy, 
DAPT for 1 to 4 weeks followed by clopidogrel 
alone for 6 months should be administered in  
addition to DOAC.†23
2a B-R12. In patients with CCD who have undergone PCI and 
who require oral anticoagulant therapy, continuing 
aspirin in addition to clopidogrel for up to 1 month 
is reasonable if the patient has a high thrombotic 
risk and low bleeding risk.*23–25
2b B-R13. In patients with CCD who require oral anticoagula-
tion and have a low atherothrombotic risk, discon-
tinuation of aspirin therapy with continuation of 
DOAC alone may be considered 1 year after PCI  
to reduce bleeding risk.*26
2b C-LD14. In patients with CCD who require oral anticoagula-
tion, DOAC monotherapy may be considered if 
there is no acute indication for concomitant anti-
platelet therapy.27–29
Antiplatelet Therapy and Low-Dose DOAC
2a B-R15. In patients with CCD without an indication for ther-
apeutic DOAC or DAPT and who are at high risk 
of recurrent ischemic events but low-to-moderate 
bleeding risk, the addition of low-dose rivaroxaban 
2.5 mg twice daily to aspirin 81 mg daily is reason-
able for long-term reduction of risk for MACE.30–32
DAPT and Proton Pump Inhibitor (PPI)
2a B-R16. In patients with CCD on DAPT, the use of a PPI 
can be effective in reducing gastrointestinal bleed-
ing risk.*33
*Modified from the 2016 ACC/AHA Guideline Focused Update on DAPT.34
†Modified from the 2021 ACC/AHA/SCAI Guideline for Coronary Artery Re-
vascularization.35
Synopsis
These recommendations on the use of antiplatelet ther-
apy in patients with CCD update and supplement the 
2016 AHA/ACC guideline for DAPT.34 Significant ben-
efits remain for aspirin use in secondary prevention.2,36,37 
The use of DAPT can be considered in those who have 
high thrombotic risk and low bleeding risk. Figure 9 sum-
marizes recommendations for antiplatelet therapy in 
CCD. The use of validated risk scores to address bleed-
ing risk can be useful in choice and duration of antiplate-
let therapy. The more frequently used risk calculators are 
PRECISE DAPT (Predicting Bleeding Complications in 
Patients Undergoing Stent Implantation and Subsequent 
Dual Antiplatelet Therapy), DAPT, and PARIS (Patterns 
of Non-Adherence to Antiplatelet Regimen in Stented 
Patients) risk scores.18–20 Several clinical trials have eval-
uated strategies for concurrent use of antiplatelet agents 
and DOACs in patients with atherosclerotic disease. The 
breadth and consistency of trials evaluating the effica-
cy and safety of DOAC use with or without antiplatelet 
therapy among patients with CCD and with or without 
AF is modest.27 ,28,30-32,38–44 The combination of antiplatelet Recommendations for Antiplatelet Therapy and Oral Anticoagulants 
(Continued )
COR LOE Recommendations 
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on November 12, 2025

CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINESCirculation. 2023;148:e9–e119. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000001168 August 29, 2023
Virani et al 2023 AHA/ACC/ACCP/ASPC/NLA/PCNA Chronic Coronary Disease Guideline e51therapy and standard dose DOACs for reducing stroke 
risk among patients with atrial fibrillation (dabigatran 
150 mg twice daily, apixaban 5 mg twice daily, rivaroxa-
ban 20 mg daily, edoxaban 60 mg daily) is not without 
added bleeding risk. The variability in treatment duration, 
as well as various platelet adenosine diphosphate recep-
tor (P2Y12) agents and DOAC regimens tested in these 
trials highlights the need for an individualized approach 
to achieve the optimal balance between ischemic and 
bleeding risks. Although DES are the predominant stent 
used in the United States, bare metal stents are still used 
in a small proportion of patients. The reader is referred 
to the 2016 AHA/ACC guideline for DAPT34 for specific 
treatment details for bare metal stents.
Recommendation-Specific Supportive Text
 1. The use of aspirin for secondary ASCVD preven-
tion is well established for reduction in MACE.2,45 
More recently, the ADAPTABLE (Aspirin Dosing: A Patient-Centric Trial Assessing Benefits and Long-
Term) trial used a large (N=15 076), open-label 
design to assign patients with established ASCVD 
to either 81 mg or 325 mg of aspirin.3 No sig-
nificant differences were observed in the primary 
composite of death from any cause, hospitalization 
for MI, or hospitalization for stroke by aspirin dose. 
No differences in major bleeding were observed. 
However, substantial dose switching was observed 
(41.6% of patients assigned to take 325 mg daily 
switched to 81 mg daily and 7 .1% assigned to 
take 81 mg daily switched to 325 mg daily). As 
an alternative to low-dose aspirin, clopidogrel may 
be used in individuals who cannot tolerate aspirin 
therapy, and many of the contemporary trials have 
used clopidogrel monotherapy after a short course 
of DAPT.46,47
 2. To assess optimal duration of antiplatelet therapy, 
a meta-analysis of RCTs (n=31 666 patients) 
comparing shorter DAPT with longer DAPT 
Figure 9. Recommended Duration of Antiplatelet Therapy. *†
ACS indicates acute coronary syndrome; ASA, aspirin; CCD, chronic coronary disease; DAPT, dual antiplatelet therapy; DES, drug-eluting stent; 
DOAC, direct oral anticoagulant; MI, myocardial infarction; OAC, oral anticoagulants; PCI, percutaneous coronary intervention; SAPT, single 
antiplatelet therapy. *Colors correspond to Class of Recommendation in Table 3. †This figure does not encompass all recommendations within 
this section.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on November 12, 2025

CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINESAugust 29, 2023 Circulation. 2023;148:e9–e119. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000001168
Virani et al 2023 AHA/ACC/ACCP/ASPC/NLA/PCNA Chronic Coronary Disease Guideline e52showed that shorter DAPT was associated with 
lower all-cause mortality.4 Patients treated with 
DAPT for ≤ 6 months had similar mortality rates, 
MI, and stent thrombosis, but lower rates of 
major bleeding than patients treated with 1-year 
DAPT.4 Data supporting the use of DAPT for 
6 months with continued use of aspirin after 6 
months come from several trials. The largest 
trial was ISAR-SAFE (Randomized, Double Blind 
Trial of 6 Versus 12 Months of DAPT After DES-
Implantation; N=4005 patients, of which 60% 
had stable CAD).7 In these trials, aspirin use 
continued for the duration of the 12-month trial 
design.5,12 Data are limited on which antiplatelet 
agent—aspirin or clopidogrel—is best for indefinite 
therapy after a 12-month period after PCI. The 
HOST-Exam (Harmonizing Optimal Strategy for 
Treatment of coronary artery diseases-Extended 
Antiplatelet Monotherapy) trial enrolled 5530 
East Asian participants if they tolerated DAPT 
for 6 to 18 months without any ischemic or major 
bleeding complication and randomized them to 
receive clopidogrel 75 mg daily or aspirin 100 mg 
daily for 24 months.46 The benefit of clopidogrel 
over aspirin was observed in both thrombotic and 
bleeding complications. This study used an open-
label design in a homogenous East Asian popu-
lation known to have lower rates of thrombotic 
complications, and the observed event rate was 
lower than expected. Therefore, further clinical 
trials would be useful to guide recommendations 
regarding the long-term use of clopidogrel versus 
aspirin as SAPT in CCD.46,48,49
 3. Multiple clinical trials (SMART CHOICE 
[Comparison Between P2Y12 Antagonist 
Monotherapy and Dual Antiplatelet Therapy after 
DES], STOP-DAPT2 [Short and Optimal Duration 
of Dual Antiplatelet Therapy after Everolimus-
Eluting Cobalt-Chromium Stent-2 Acute Coronary 
Syndrome], TWILIGHT [Ticagrelor With Aspirin 
or Alone in High-Risk Patients After Coronary 
Intervention], and GLOBAL LEADERS [A Clinical 
Study Comparing Two Forms of Antiplatelet 
Therapy After Stent Implantation]) found reduced 
bleeding complications without increased ischemic 
complications when DAPT was used for 1 to 3 
months followed by P2Y12 monotherapy.8,9,47 ,50–52 
These trial populations comprised 35% to 62% 
in stable patients with stable CAD. In a network 
meta-analysis that included 29 089 patients ran-
domized to short-term DAPT followed by P2Y12 
inhibitor monotherapy versus standard duration 
DAPT, a net clinical benefit was seen that favored 
short-term DAPT followed by P2Y12 inhibitor 
monotherapy with less MI and bleeding.8 A meta-
analysis showed discontinuation of aspirin after 1 to 3 months with continuation of a P2Y12 agent 
(mostly prasugrel or ticagrelor) reduced the risk 
of major bleeding by 40% without an increased 
risk of MACE.10 These trials were not powered to 
assess ischemic events, particularly stent throm-
bosis. Therefore, longer duration DAPT may be 
needed for patients with higher thrombotic risk 
(eg, several lesions, long stent length, bifurca-
tion location, atherectomy use, lesion location [left 
main], bypass graft, or chronic occlusion).
 4. A systematic review and meta-analysis of pro-
spective RCTs of secondary prevention examined 
data from 33 435 participants. Of these, 20 203 
were treated with DAPT and 13 232 were given 
only aspirin. Patients were considered high risk 
and almost half had previous MI. Comorbidities 
also included diabetes, previous PCI, and CKD. 
Extended DAPT for >1 year reduced MACE (rela-
tive risk, 0.78 [95% CI, 0.67-0.90]; P=0.001) and 
absolute risk difference of 1.09%, or a number 
needed to treat for benefit of 91 to prevent 1 
MACE over 31-month follow up. This came with 
an increased absolute 0.8% risk of major bleeding 
without significant intracranial or fatal bleeding.13 
Similarly, a systematic review conducted for the 
2016 ACC/AHA guidelines on DAPT34 exam-
ined the incidence of death, major hemorrhage, 
MI, stent thrombosis, and major adverse cardiac 
events in 33 051 patients in 11 RCTs of pro-
longed versus short-course DAPT after stenting 
with DES and in secondary prevention after MI. 
Among those treated with DES, prolonged DAPT 
reduced stent thrombosis and MI but increased 
major hemorrhage. Patients with previous MI 
had evidence of reduced cardiovascular events 
at the expense of increased bleeding.53–55 The 
PEGASUS-TIMI 54 (Prevention of Cardiovascular 
Events in Patients with Prior Heart Attack Using 
Ticagrelor Compared to Placebo on a Background 
of Aspirin-Thrombolysis in Myocardial Infarction 
54) trial enrolled 21162 patients who had MI 1 
to 3 years before being given ticagrelor 90 mg 
or 60 mg twice daily compared with placebo on a 
background of low-dose aspirin.56 Treatment with 
ticagrelor 60 mg reduced the risk of cardiovascu-
lar death, MI, or stroke by 16% and increased the 
risk of major bleeding at 33-month follow up.14
 5. Given multiple pathways of platelet activation, 
options for additional suppression of platelet 
activity have been studied. PAR-1 is a key recep-
tor for thrombin activation. Vorapaxar selectively 
inhibits PAR-1 on platelets, thereby potently 
inhibiting thrombin-induced platelet aggregation. 
The TRAP 2P TIMI 50 (Trial to Assess the Effects 
of SCH 530348 in Preventing Heart Attack and 
Stroke in Patients with Atherosclerosis) trial 
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on November 12, 2025

CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINESCirculation. 2023;148:e9–e119. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000001168 August 29, 2023
Virani et al 2023 AHA/ACC/ACCP/ASPC/NLA/PCNA Chronic Coronary Disease Guideline e53randomized 26 449 patients with history of MI, 
ischemic stroke, or peripheral artery disease to 
either 2.5 mg of vorapaxar daily or placebo on a 
background of aspirin therapy. At a mean follow 
up of 3 years, patients who received vorapaxar 
experienced an ischemic event less often or died 
from cardiovascular causes; however, they had 
more major and intracranial bleeding.15 In a pre-
specified subgroup analysis of 17 779 patients 
who had previous MI, there was a reduced inci-
dence of cardiovascular death, MI, or stroke in the 
vorapaxar group compared with placebo; however, 
moderate or severe bleeding was increased.16 In 
a prespecified analysis of 16 897 patients with 
previous MI without a history of stroke or TIA 
and on thienopyridine therapy, vorapaxar reduced 
the composite of cardiovascular death, MI, or 
stroke compared with thienopyridine use; how-
ever, GUSTO (Global Utilization of Streptokinase 
and Tissue Plasminogen Activator for Occluded 
Coronary Arteries) moderate or severe bleeding 
was increased. Three-year rates of fatal bleed-
ing were 0.2% versus 0.1% in patients receiv-
ing vorapaxar versus thienopyridine. Intracranial 
hemorrhage rates were 0.5% versus 0.4% in that 
cohort. Vorapaxar had net clinical benefit with a 
combined risk of all-cause death, MI, stroke, or 
GUSTO severe bleeding decreased by 13% 
compared with placebo. Of note, thienopyridine 
use was not randomized in this study; therefore, 
formal comparison is limited. The thienopyridine 
used was clopidogrel therefore extrapolation to 
more potent P2Y12 agents is not possible.17
 6. In a systematic review and meta-analysis of 
observational and RCTs (N=20 315 patients) 
comparing DAPT with SAPT after urgent or elec-
tive CABG,18 investigators performed a pooled 
sensitivity analysis of studies with stable isch-
emic heart disease–predominant patients (>50% 
of study population), and found no difference 
between SAPT and DAPT after CABG in overall 
mortality (odds ratio, 0.83 [95% CI, 0.63–1.10]; 
P=0.20), cardiovascular mortality (odds ratio, 
0.66 [95% CI, 0.34–1.29]; P =0.23), MI (odds 
ratio, 1.15 [95% CI, 0.66–1.99]; P=0.63), stroke 
(odds ratio, 0.58 [95% CI, 0.32–1.06]; P =0.08), 
combined incidence of cardiovascular death, MI, 
and stroke (odds ratio, 0.81 [95% CI, 0.57–1.16]; 
P=0.25), and arterial graft occlusions (odds ratio, 
1.13 [95% CI, 0.73–1.73]; P =0.59). In the studies 
that had predominantly stable patients with CAD, 
the rate of saphenous vein graft occlusion was 
lower among those receiving DAPT (odds ratio, 
0.74 [95% CI, 0.60–0.90]; P <0.01).
 7 . Clopidogrel plus aspirin is not more effective than 
aspirin alone in reducing the rate of MI, stroke, or death from cardiovascular causes in patients at 
high risk for atherothrombotic events.19
 8. In the TRAP 2P–TIMI 50 trial, after 2 years the 
data and safety monitoring board recommended 
discontinuation of study treatment in patients with 
a history of stroke because of the risk of intracra-
nial hemorrhage. Significant reduction in cardio-
vascular death, MI, stroke, or recurrent ischemia 
leading to revascularization was observed; how-
ever, the primary driver of benefit was in lower risk 
of MI, at a cost of increased moderate to severe 
bleeding along with increased intracranial bleed-
ing.15,57 Vorapaxar is FDA approved for use in 
patients with previous MI for the reduction in car-
diovascular death, MI, stroke, or recurrent ischemia 
leading to revascularization; however, it carries a 
55% increase in moderate or severe bleeding and 
is contraindicated with a history of stroke, TIA, or 
intracranial hemorrhage.
 9. In the TRITON-TIMI 38 (Therapeutic Outcomes 
by Optimizing Platelet Inhibition With Prasugrel–
Thrombolysis In Myocardial Infarction 38) trial, 
patients with previous TIA or stroke had increased 
risk of intracranial hemorrhage leading to an FDA 
warning: Prasugrel can cause significant, some-
times fatal, bleeding and should not be used in 
patients with active pathological bleeding or with a 
history of TIA or stroke. Patients ≥75 years of age 
and weighing <60 kg had less clinical efficacy with 
prasugrel use.21,58
 10. Investigators have assessed the vascular and gas-
trointestinal side effects in patients with vascular 
disease and have found major vascular events 
were increased by about a third by a coxib (rela-
tive risk, 1.37 [95% CI, 1.14–1.66]; P =0.0009) 
or diclofenac (relative risk, 1.41 [95% CI, 1.12–
1.78]; P=0.0036), because of an increase in 
major coronary events (coxibs relative risk, 1.76 
[95% CI, 1.31–2.37]; P =0.0001; diclofenac rel-
ative risk, 1.70 [95% CI, 1.19–2.41]; P =0.0032). 
Ibuprofen also significantly increased major cor-
onary events (relative risk, 2.22 [95% CI, 1.10–
4.48]; P=0.0253). Vascular death was increased 
significantly by coxibs (relative risk, 1.58 [99% 
CI, 1.00–2.49]; P=0.0103) and diclofenac (rela-
tive risk, 1.65 [95% CI, 0.95–2.85], P=0.0187). 
HF risk was doubled by all nonsteroidal anti-
inflammatory drugs.22 However, at moderate 
doses, celecoxib was found to be noninferior 
to naproxen or ibuprofen regarding increased 
cardiovascular risk in patients with arthritis who 
were considered high cardiovascular risk (stable 
angina, history of MI, unstable angina, status 
post CABG or PCI, TIA, or cerebrovascular acci-
dent within 3 months, >50% stenosis, carotid 
disease, peripheral artery disease, diabetes, age 
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on November 12, 2025

CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINESAugust 29, 2023 Circulation. 2023;148:e9–e119. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000001168
Virani et al 2023 AHA/ACC/ACCP/ASPC/NLA/PCNA Chronic Coronary Disease Guideline e54>55 years in men, age >65 years in women, 
hyperlipidemia, hypertension, early family history 
of CAD, smoking). These trials involved cele-
coxib, rofecoxib, etoricoxib, and lumiracoxib and 
3 high-dose nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory regi-
mens: diclofenac 150 mg, ibuprofen 2400 mg, 
and naproxen 1000 mg daily.
 11. A systematic review and network meta-analysis 
of 4 RCTs, including 10 026 patients (39%–72% 
with stable CAD)23,59 showed that the combina-
tion of a DOAC with a P2Y12 inhibitor was asso-
ciated with less bleeding compared with vitamin 
K agonists and DAPT. The omission of aspirin 
led to less bleeding, including intracranial bleed-
ing, without differences in MACE, compared with 
strategies including aspirin.59 In an updated net-
work meta-analysis including these trials and a 
fifth trial (ENTRUST-AF PCI [Edoxaban Treatment 
Versus Vitamin K Antagonist in Patients with Atrial 
Fibrillation Undergoing Percutaneous Coronary 
Intervention]; N=11 542), fewer bleeding compli-
cations were observed with preserved antithrom-
botic efficacy when aspirin was discontinued 
within a few days (3–14 days) after PCI. The 
authors concluded that an antithrombotic regimen 
of vitamin K agonists plus DAPT should generally 
be avoided. The use of a DOAC (apixaban 5 mg 
twice daily or 2.5 mg twice daily in those with 2 
of 3 criteria for high bleeding risk; rivaroxaban 15 
mg daily; edoxaban 60 mg daily or 30 mg if creati-
nine clearance 15-50 mL/min, weight <60 kg, or 
concurrent use of specific potent P-glycoprotein 
inhibitors; and dabigatran 110 mg or 150 mg 
twice daily) plus a P2Y12 inhibitor without aspi-
rin may be the most favorable treatment option 
and the preferred antithrombotic regimen for 
most patients with AF undergoing PCI. The 
AUGUSTUS trial (A Study of Apixaban in Patients 
with AF, not Caused by a Heart Valve Problem, 
who are at Risk for Thrombosis due to having had 
a Recent Coronary Event, such as a Heart Attack 
or a Procedure to Open the Vessels of the Heart) 
examined randomized treatment effects of low-
dose aspirin (compared with placebo) and apixa-
ban (compared with vitamin K antagonist [VKA]) 
on the risk of stent thrombosis and found a 2-fold 
increase in bleeding with aspirin while the inci-
dence of stent thrombosis was low, occurring in 
<1% over 6 months. However, the study had lim-
ited power to detect a difference in stent throm-
bosis. Rates of stent thrombosis were lower with 
aspirin compared with placebo and with apixaban 
compared with VKA. Among patients with a high 
risk of stent thrombosis and an acceptable bleed-
ing risk, the use of aspirin up to 30 days after PCI 
should be considered.25 12. Triple therapy after PCI in patients with AF 
increases bleeding risk without significant reduc-
tion in ischemic risk.59 A recent expert consensus 
document recommends triple therapy with aspirin, 
a P2Y12 inhibitor, and an oral anticoagulant for up 
to 30 days after PCI for patients at particularly high 
risk for coronary thrombosis such as previous MI, 
complex lesions, presence of select traditional car-
diovascular risk factors, or extensive CVD but with 
bleeding risk that is judged to be low.29 A subgroup 
analysis of the REDUAL PCI trial (Dual Therapy 
with Dabigatran/Ticagrelor Versus Dual Therapy 
with Dabigatran/Clopidogrel in ACS Patients with 
Indication for NOAC Undergoing PCI) examined 
effect of lesion complexity and clinical risk factors. 
This trial found that dabigatran dual therapy after 
PCI was associated with reduced bleeding risk 
compared with warfarin triple therapy, independent 
of the presence of procedural or clinical complex-
ity factors. However, patients in the highest lesion 
complexity and clinical risk factor group had the 
highest hazard ratio (1.43 [95% CI, 0.74-2.77]) for 
death, thromboembolic event, or unplanned revas-
cularization in the dabigatran 110 mg dual therapy 
compared with dabigatran 150 mg dual therapy 
(hazard ratio, 0.88 [95% CI, 0.33-2.36]) both com-
pared with warfarin triple therapy.60–63
 13. The AFIRE (Atrial Fibrillation and Ischemic Events 
With Rivaroxaban) trial was a multicenter, open-
label trial that randomized 2236 patients with AF 
who had previous PCI or CABG >1 year earlier or 
who had CCD to rivaroxaban versus rivaroxaban 
plus a single antiplatelet agent (70.2% received 
aspirin, and 26.8% received a P2Y12 inhibitor). 
The primary endpoint was a composite of stroke, 
systemic embolism, MI, unstable angina requiring 
revascularization, or death from any cause, with 
a safety endpoint of major bleeding. Rivaroxaban 
monotherapy was noninferior to combination ther-
apy for efficacy and superior for safety among 
patients with AF and stable CAD. In patients with 
stable CCD and AF, the addition of antiplatelet 
therapy to a VKA does not reduce the risk of recur-
rent coronary events or thrombosis; furthermore, 
this combination leads to significantly increased 
bleeding risk.26,64,65
 14. Several studies have evaluated triple therapy with a 
DOAC and DAPT as well as a DOAC and SAPT in 
patients with AF and recent ACS.27 ,28,38–44 Although 
these trials showed a lower risk of bleeding with 
a DOAC combined with a single antiplatelet agent 
compared with triple therapy, none of the studies 
were powered to clearly show differences in reduc-
ing ischemic events. Additionally, data are limited 
comparing either of these therapies for secondary 
prevention in patients with AF. This recommendation 
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on November 12, 2025

CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINESCirculation. 2023;148:e9–e119. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000001168 August 29, 2023
Virani et al 2023 AHA/ACC/ACCP/ASPC/NLA/PCNA Chronic Coronary Disease Guideline e55is based on historical data with warfarin as well as 
data extrapolated from more recent studies evalu-
ating various combination therapies versus mono-
therapy in patients with a recent ACS.38-44,66–70
 15. The COMPASS (Cardiovascular Outcomes for 
People Using Anticoagulation Strategies) trial 
evaluated the efficacy and safety of low-dose 
rivaroxaban 2.5 mg twice daily, with or without 
low-dose aspirin therapy, in reducing CVD events 
in patients with stable ASCVD.30 The primary 
outcome of cardiovascular death, stroke, or MI 
occurred in 4.1% of the aspirin plus rivaroxaban 
group, 4.9% of the rivaroxaban alone group, and 
5.4% for aspirin monotherapy. The study was 
terminated early because of the observed ben-
efit of rivaroxaban plus aspirin compared with 
aspirin alone. Evaluation of high-risk patients 
(multivessel CAD and at least one of the follow-
ing: diabetes requiring medication, recurrent MI, 
peripheral artery disease, HF, or CKD with an 
eGFR of 15-59 mL/min/m2 69) showed an abso-
lute net clinical benefit with combination therapy, 
with substantial reductions in ischemic events and 
all-cause death.31 The high-risk population also 
derived a larger absolute risk reduction, resulting 
in an even lower number needed to treat.30–32 The 
combination of rivaroxaban plus aspirin resulted 
in a higher risk of major bleeding compared with 
aspirin monotherapy (3.1% versus 1.9%; hazard 
ratio, 1.70 [95% CI, 1.40–2.05]; P <0.001]). The 
use of DAPT was an exclusion criteria.
 16. Increased bleeding including gastrointestinal 
bleeding is a common side effect of DAPT; the 
mitigation of this risk has been an area of clini-
cal investigation. SAPT (aspirin or clopidogrel) 
compared with DAPT leads to lower gastric or 
small intestinal mucosal injury.71 Aspirin increases 
gastroduodenal ulcer formation. When combined 
with aspirin therapy, P2Y12 inhibitors can pro-
mote gastric ulcer bleeding. Clopidogrel is a pro-
drug that requires cytochrome CYP P450 2C19 
for metabolism to its active form. PPIs are also 
metabolized by the P450 system, thereby lead-
ing to concern for inadequate clopidogrel therapy 
in those on both PPIs and DAPT. The FDA has 
added a boxed warning to avoid use of omepra-
zole with clopidogrel as well as other potent CYP 
2C19 inhibitors, including esomeprazole. Several 
studies assessed the safety and efficacy of PPI in 
the context of DAPT. A meta-analysis of 6 RCTs 
(6930 patients) showed that the use of PPIs is 
associated with a reduced risk of gastrointesti-
nal bleeding in patients treated with DAPT after 
PCI. No significant differences were observed in 
the incidence of MACE, MI, and all-cause death in 
patients with CAD on DAPT and PPIs.334.3.2. Beta Blockers
Recommendations for Beta Blockers
Referenced studies that support the recommendations are  
summarized in the Online Data Supplement. 
COR LOE Recommendations 
1 A 1. In patients with CCD and L VEF ≤40% with or  
without previous MI, the use of beta-blocker ther-
apy is recommended to reduce the risk of future 
MACE, including cardiovascular death.1–3
1 A 2. In patients with CCD and L VEF <50%, the use of 
sustained release metoprolol succinate, carvedilol, 
or bisoprolol with titration to target doses is recom-
mended in preference to other beta blockers.*1,3–8
2b B-NR 3. In patients with CCD who were initiated on beta-
blocker therapy for previous MI without a history 
of or current L VEF ≤ 50%, angina, arrhythmias, or 
uncontrolled hypertension, it may be reasonable to 
reassess the indication for long-term (>1 year) use 
of beta-blocker therapy for reducing MACE.9–15
3: No 
BenefitB-NR 4. In patients with CCD without previous MI or L VEF 
≤50%, the use of beta-blocker therapy is not ben-
eficial in reducing MACE, in the absence of another 
primary indication for beta-blocker therapy.†16–19
*Modified from the 2022 AHA/ACC/HFSA Guideline for the Management of 
Heart Failure.20
†Adapted from the 2021 ACC/AHA/SCAI Guideline for Coronary Artery Re-
vascularization.21
Synopsis
Beta blockers exhibit their clinical effects by decreasing 
myocardial oxygen demand, improving ischemic thresh-
old, and impeding maladaptive L V remodeling.1,22–24 
Patients with CCD comprise patients with or without 
previous MI, L V systolic dysfunction, or both. These dis-
tinctions should be considered in determining the indi-
cations for use of beta-blocker therapy in patients with 
CCD. The strongest data for the benefit of beta-blocker 
therapy in CCD is for patients with L V systolic dysfunc-
tion but is less clear for patients without L V dysfunc-
tion.1,3-8,13-15,25–27 Several ongoing RCTs hope to better 
elucidate the need for and duration of beta-blocker 
therapy for MACE reduction among post-MI patients 
with preserved L V systolic function in the contemporary 
era. Other primary indications for beta blockers may in-
clude their use for angina, uncontrolled hypertension, 
or arrhythmias. A comprehensive screening as well as 
assessment of their symptoms and comorbid condi-
tions is recommended given that beta-blocker therapy 
may still be indicated for its antianginal properties (see 
Section 4.3.6), antihypertensive properties (see Section 
4.2.7 , “Blood Pressure Management”), or for its negative 
chronotropic effects among patients with rhythm distur-
bance disorders.28,29
Recommendation-Specific Supportive Text
 1. Multiple well-conducted RCTs from the precontem-
porary as well as modern era showed the efficacy 
of beta-blocker therapy in reducing cardiovascular 
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on November 12, 2025

CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINESAugust 29, 2023 Circulation. 2023;148:e9–e119. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000001168
Virani et al 2023 AHA/ACC/ACCP/ASPC/NLA/PCNA Chronic Coronary Disease Guideline e56death and MACE among patients with L V systolic 
dysfunction.1-4,7 ,25 This benefit was found among 
patients with previous MI and those without history 
of MI.1,2,4,5,25 Furthermore, data from the KAMIR-
NIH (Korea Acute Myocardial Infarction Registry-
National Institute of Health) registry suggest 
that the clinical benefits of beta-blocker therapy 
may extend beyond patients with reduced L VEF 
(≤40%) and even toward patients with mid-range 
L VEF (40%–49%).2 Given unequivocal benefit 
of beta-blocker therapy, widespread use of these 
agents in this subset of patients has been recom-
mended. For detailed discussion of beta-blocker 
use in heart failure patients, see the “2022 AHA/
ACC/HFSA Guideline for the Management of 
Heart Failure.”20
 2. Different beta blockers have been at the cen-
ter of multiple clinical investigations evaluating 
their effectiveness among patients with HF with 
L V systolic dysfunction.3,4,8,30–32 CIBIS-II (Cardiac 
Insufficiency Bisoprolol Trial II), COPERNICUS 
(Carvedilol Prospective Randomized Cumulative 
Survival Study), and MERIT-HF (Metoprolol 
Randomized Intervention Trial in Congestive Heart 
Failure) RCTs have shown clinical efficacy of biso-
prolol, carvedilol, and metoprolol succinate among 
patients with L V systolic dysfunction in reducing 
cardiovascular death and MACE.3,4,30 Continued 
dose titration was performed within these trials to 
target doses of 10 mg per day for bisoprolol, 200 
mg per day for metoprolol succinate, and 25 mg 
twice daily for carvedilol (or 50 mg twice daily for 
patients weighing >84 kg).
 3. Although previous iterations of the ACC/AHA 
guidelines on patients with stable ischemic heart 
disease recommended the use of beta-blocker 
therapy in patients with previous MI and pre-
served L V systolic function, this recommendation 
was based on data gathered from the noncon-
temporary era.33 In the contemporary era of 
timely reperfusion/revascularization and progres-
sive pharmacotherapy (including antithrombotic 
and lipid-lowering therapy) among patients with 
MI, the recommendation for long-term use (>1 
year) of beta-blocker therapy in the absence of 
L V systolic dysfunction has been challenged.13,14 
Observational studies from the current era evalu-
ating post-MI patients with preserved L V systolic 
function showed discrepant results with some 
studies suggesting clinical benefit while others 
showed lack of clinical benefit with long-term 
use of beta-blocker therapy.9-15,34 Long-term use 
of beta-blocker therapy may also confer poten-
tial clinical risks including fatigue, depression, 
and drug-drug interactions, thereby necessitat-
ing future high-quality data to ascertain the need for and duration of beta-blocker use among this 
population. Several ongoing large randomized 
controlled clinical trials including REBOOT-CNIC  
(Treatment with Beta-blockers after MI with-
out Reduced Ejection Fraction), REDUCE-
SWEDEHEART (Evaluation of Decreased Usage 
of Beta-blockers After MI in the Swedeheart 
Registry), BETAMI (Beta-blocker Treatment after 
Acute MI in Revascularized Patients without 
Reduced L VEF), and DANBLOCK (Danish Trial of 
Beta-blocker Treatment after MI Without Reduced 
L VEF) aim to provide more clarity on the efficacy, 
safety, and QOL associated with beta-blocker 
therapy in patients with CCD, including post-MI 
patients with preserved L V systolic function.
 4. Protective clinical benefits of beta-blocker therapy 
in reducing cardiovascular death have not been 
shown among CCD patients without previous MI 
or L V systolic dysfunction. The REACH (Reduction 
of Atherothrombosis for Continued Health) reg-
istry evaluated patients with CAD without his-
tory of MI and studied the effect of beta-blocker 
therapy on the primary endpoint of cardiovascular 
death, nonfatal MI, or nonfatal stroke.18 Among 
patients with CAD without a history of MI, the use 
of beta-blocker therapy was not associated with 
a significant reduction in event rates for the pri-
mary endpoint. Similarly, a recent analysis from the 
National Cardiovascular Data Registry CathPCI 
registry evaluated the clinical benefit of beta block-
ers among patients with stable angina without a 
history of MI, L V systolic dysfunction, or systolic HF 
who were undergoing PCI.19 The authors showed 
that the use of beta blockers was not associated 
with improvement in cardiovascular morbidity or 
mortality rates at 30 days or at 3-year follow-up. 
Similar results were seen in a post-hoc analy-
sis from the CHARISMA (Clopidogrel for High 
Atherothrombotic Risk and Ischemic Stabilization, 
Management and Avoidance) trial in which no 
reduction in cardiovascular events was observed 
with the use of beta blockers among patients with-
out previous MI or HF.17
4.3.3. Renin-Angiotensin-Aldosterone Inhibitors
Recommendations for Renin-Angiotensin-Aldosterone Inhibitors
Referenced studies that support the recommendations are  
summarized in the Online Data Supplement. 
COR LOE Recommendations 
1 A 1. In patients with CCD who also have hypertension, 
diabetes, L VEF ≤40%, or CKD, the use of ACE 
inhibitors, or ARBs if ACE inhibitor–intolerant, is 
recommended to reduce cardiovascular events.1–5
2b B-R 2. In patients with CCD without hypertension, dia-
betes, or CKD and L VEF >40%, the use of ACE 
inhibitors or ARBs may be considered to reduce 
cardiovascular events. 6–10
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on November 12, 2025

CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINESCirculation. 2023;148:e9–e119. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000001168 August 29, 2023
Virani et al 2023 AHA/ACC/ACCP/ASPC/NLA/PCNA Chronic Coronary Disease Guideline e57Synopsis
Patients at high risk for CCD who have structural abnor-
malities (L VEF ≤40%), comorbid conditions (eg, diabetes, 
CKD, hypertension), or both are at significantly elevated 
risk of developing symptomatic HF and recurrent cardio-
vascular events. In addition to lowering BP (see Section 
4.2.6, “Lipid Management”), renin-angiotensin-aldoste-
rone system inhibitors (RAASi) decrease MACE in high-
risk patients with CCD.1,3,5,8 In contrast, the efficacy of 
RAASi is less certain among populations with CCD with 
L VEF >40% and without comorbid hypertension, diabe-
tes, or CKD.6,8,9,11,12 RAASi trials (PEACE [Prevention of 
Events with Angiotensin Converting Enzyme Inhibition], 
QUIET [Quinapril Ischemic Event Trial], CAMELOT [Com-
parison of Amlodipine versus Enalapril to Limit Occur-
rences of Thrombosis], and IMAGINE [Clazakizumab 
for the Treatment of Chronic Active Antibody Mediated 
Rejection in Kidney Transplant Recipients]) in lower-
risk populations with CCD showed no consistent CVD 
event reduction.8,11,13 Patients on RAASi therapy require 
close follow-up after medication initiation and titration, 
including assessment of adherence, BP control, labora-
tory testing, evaluation for potential adverse effects (eg, 
orthostatic hypotension), intolerance (eg, cough, angio-
edema), or both. ARBs should be used as an alternative 
for patients who are ACE intolerant.14,15
Recommendation-Specific Supportive Text
 1. In RCTs,1–5 RAASi improved symptoms, reduced 
hospitalizations, prolonged survival, or all 3 among 
high-risk patients with CCD. In patients with hyper-
tension and diabetes, RAASi reduce the incidence 
of moderate albuminuria and end-stage renal dis-
ease.16–18 For patients with CCD and L VEF ≤40% 
who are clinically symptomatic beyond stage B, 
refer to the 2022 AHA/ACC/HFSA heart failure 
guideline.19
 2. In the HOPE trial,10 high-risk patients with CCD 
and preserved L VEF assigned to ramipril 10 mg 
daily had significant reductions in the composite of 
death, cardiovascular events, and stroke, although 
the concurrent use of other risk reduction medi-
cations was low compared with other trials.10 The 
EUROPA trial compared perindopril 8 mg daily to 
placebo in a lower risk population.9 In the PEACE 
trial,20 which compared trandolapril versus placebo 
in populations with CCD and normal L VEF, RAASi 
were not associated with reduced total mortality 
rate; however, there was a benefit in a subset of 
patients with reduced renal function (eGFR, <60 
mL/min/m2).11 In QUIET,13 quinapril had no effect 
on progression of atherosclerosis in patients with 
CCD and preserved L VEF, except in those with 
CKD. The CAMELOT study8 found no reduction in 
MACE among patients with CCD and normal BP. The lack of overall benefit of RAASi in lower risk 
populations likely reflects both baseline comorbidi-
ties and levels of concurrent pharmacotherapies 
with other evidence-based therapies for CCD.20,21
4.3.4. Colchicine
Recommendation for Colchicine
Referenced studies that support the recommendation are  
summarized in the Online Data Supplement. 
COR LOE Recommendation 
2b B-R 1. In patients with CCD, the addition of colchicine for 
secondary prevention may be considered to reduce 
recurrent ASCVD events.1,2
Synopsis
Inflammation is a key component in the development of 
atherosclerosis.3 As a result, using select anti-inflamma-
tory agents may have a role in improving cardiovascular 
outcomes. However, studies evaluating agents thus far 
have showed mixed results.4,5 Colchicine exhibits anti-
inflammatory properties by altering inflammatory cell-
medicated chemotaxis and phagocytosis by inhibiting 
microtubule polymerization.6 Colchicine also reduces 
the expression of adhesion molecules and has an ef-
fect on cytokine production.7 Given its broad cellular 
effects and its established role in the management of 
pericarditis, there has been renewed interest in its po-
tential benefits in patients with CCD. Colchicine is con-
sidered a drug with narrow therapeutic index, meaning 
there is a small difference in the dose that is effective 
and what can lead to serious or toxic adverse effects. 
Additionally, colchicine is metabolized by cytochrome 
P450 3A4 and p-glycoprotein, making it prone to drug-
drug interactions. Therefore, monitoring for adverse ef-
fects is of paramount importance. Given this, there is 
a need for a highly individualized approach, limiting the 
use of colchicine to those patients who remain at very 
high risk despite maximum tolerated GDMT until further 
data become available. A cost-effectiveness analysis of 
COLCOT (Colchicine Cardiovascular Outcomes Trial) 
showed a 47% reduction in the mean overall per patient 
costs and increased the QAL Ys from 1.30 to 1.34 for the 
trial period of 24 months with the addition of colchicine 
to standard of care for post MI treatment.8 There was 
also a 69% reduction in lifetime per patient cost and an 
increase in QAL Ys from 8.82 to 11.68 with colchicine 
compared to placebo, respectively. Based on the dose 
tested in clinical trials, the recommended dose of col-
chicine for use in secondary prevention in patients with 
CCD is 0.5 mg daily.
Recommendation-Specific Supportive Text
 1. The LoDoCo2 (Colchicine Reduces Risk of Major 
Cardiovascular Events in CCD) trial aimed to validate 
the LoDoCo (Low Dose Colchicine for Secondary 
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on November 12, 2025

CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINESAugust 29, 2023 Circulation. 2023;148:e9–e119. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000001168
Virani et al 2023 AHA/ACC/ACCP/ASPC/NLA/PCNA Chronic Coronary Disease Guideline e58Prevention of Cardiovascular Disease) results among 
patients with clinically stable ASCVD who had shown 
a reduced risk of recurrent cardiovascular events in 
patients taking colchicine 0.5 mg daily compared 
with placebo.2,5 The primary endpoint was a com-
posite of cardiovascular death, spontaneous MI, 
ischemic stroke, or ischemic-driven revascularization, 
which occurred in 6.8% of patients in the colchicine 
group compared with 9.6% in the placebo group 
(P<0.001). Despite the positive results, the study 
showed a trend toward increased risk of death from 
noncardiovascular causes in the colchicine group. 
The first trial to evaluate the efficacy of colchicine in 
secondary prevention in patients with ACS was the 
COLCOT trial.8,9 Of patients treated with colchicine, 
the primary endpoint of death from cardiovascular 
causes, MI, resuscitated cardiac arrest, stroke, or 
urgent hospitalization for angina leading to coro-
nary revascularization occurred in 5.5% of patients 
compared with 7 .1% in the placebo group (P =0.02). 
These results were driven primarily by reductions 
in the incidence of strokes and urgent hospitaliza-
tions for angina leading to coronary revascularization. 
Although studies evaluating colchicine in secondary 
prevention excluded patients with creatinine clear-
ance of <50 mL/min, these studies were also lim-
ited to a duration of just over 2 years.1,2 Given its long 
half-life, narrow therapeutic window, and degree of 
dependence on renal function for clearance, use 
should be avoided in patients with advanced renal 
disease (eGFR, <30 mL/min/m2). Additionally, col-
chicine is metabolized by CYP3A4 and is a substrate 
for P-glycoprotein, which necessitates careful evalu-
ation for drug-drug interactions.10
4.3.5. Immunizations
Recommendations for Immunizations
Referenced studies that support the recommendations are  
summarized in the Online Data Supplement. 
COR LOE Recommendations 
1 A 1. In patients with CCD, an annual influenza vaccina-
tion is recommended to reduce cardiovascular mor-
bidity, cardiovascular death, and all-cause death.1–7
1 C-EO 2. In patients with CCD, coronavirus disease 2019 
(COVID-19) vaccination is recommended per 
public health guidelines to reduce COVID-19 com-
plications.8–10
2a B-NR 3. In patients with CCD, a pneumococcal vaccine is 
reasonable to reduce cardiovascular morbidity and 
mortality and all-cause death.11–13
Synopsis
Infections such as influenza, pneumococcal pneumonia, 
and COVID-19 are a contributing factor to MACE and 
all-cause death, especially in patients with CCD.1,2,8,12 The 
mechanisms by which infections such as these increase cardiovascular events may be related to proinflammatory 
mediators, stimulation of the sympathetic system, and co-
agulation cascade activation, which may cause rupture of 
vulnerable atherosclerotic plaques.14 Vaccination against 
these respiratory infections may not only improve clinical 
outcomes but also potentially reduce hospitalization and 
health care costs. RCTs and nonrandomized clinical tri-
als have concluded that vaccination for these infections 
offer the greatest benefit in the highest risk populations, 
which includes those with advanced age, CCD, or both. 
Vaccination promotion is the best defense in protecting 
those with CCD who may be exposed to these infections 
in the community and face potential adverse clinical out-
comes as a result.
Recommendation-Specific Supportive Text
 1. Studies show a significant association between 
recent respiratory infection and acute MI.1 Meta-
analyses and systematic reviews showed that influ-
enza vaccination was associated with a lower risk of 
acute MI, cardiovascular death, MACE, and all-cause 
death in patients with CAD or HF.1-5,7 However, 1 
study found no significant reduction in MI among 
those who received the influenza vaccine compared 
with control.7 In patients with previous stroke, there 
was a nonsignificant trend for reduction of recur-
rent stroke risk.3 No reduction was seen in all-cause 
death or cardiopulmonary hospitalization in high-risk 
patients with CCD who received high-dose trivalent 
influenza vaccine versus standard-dose quadrivalent 
influenza vaccine, although more vaccine-related 
adverse reactions occurred in the high-dose triva-
lent influenza vaccine group.6
 2. Although outcome data about the benefit of the 
COVID-19 vaccination in patients with CCD are 
unavailable at the time of writing this guideline, the tar-
geted population for whom this guideline is intended 
is among the highest risk for developing COVID-19–  
related complications and death.8 Therefore, the 
writing committee supports COVID-19 vaccina-
tion for patients with CCD and that the benefits 
of the COVID-19 vaccination outweigh the poten-
tial adverse events related to the vaccine itself.8–10 
For reference, US Centers for Disease Control and 
Prevention (CDC) guidance may be accessed at 
https://www.cdc.gov/coronavirus/2019-ncov/com-
munication/guidance.html.15
 3. Limited data are available that evaluate pneumo-
coccal polysaccharide vaccination in patients with 
CCD and its effect on cardiovascular outcomes and 
all-cause death. A population-based cohort study of 
6171 patients (18% with ischemic heart disease) 
who were hospitalized for pneumonia within 90 
days and received previous pneumococcal polysac-
charide vaccination found a 58% reduction in ACS 
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on November 12, 2025

CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINESCirculation. 2023;148:e9–e119. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000001168 August 29, 2023
Virani et al 2023 AHA/ACC/ACCP/ASPC/NLA/PCNA Chronic Coronary Disease Guideline e59events (12 versus 16 events per 100 patient-years 
[adjusted hazard ratio, 0.42 (95% CI, 0.27-0.66)]).11 
A systematic review and meta-analysis of observa-
tional studies with >163 000 participants found that 
the PPSV23, PCV13, or both was associated with 
a 22% decrease in all-cause death in patients with 
CCD or those with very high cardiovascular risk, 
although the study design of some included stud-
ies led to a decreased level of design confidence.12 
A retrospective observational study using the 
2012–2015 US National Inpatient Sample data-
base evaluated the combined use of pneumococcal 
polysaccharide vaccine (PPV) and influenza vac-
cine and found lower mortality rate (2.21% versus 
1.03%; P=0.001) and lower cardiac arrest (0.61% 
versus 0.51%; P<0.001). The relative risk was 0.46 
(95% CI, 0.43–0.49) in the adjusted analysis for 
this combined vaccination group. This group also 
had significantly reduced risk of mortality among 
those admitted with MI (relative risk, 0.46), TIAs 
(relative risk, 0.58), and stroke (relative risk, 0.42) 
compared with the nonvaccinated group.13
4.3.6. Medical Therapy for Relief of Angina
Recommendations for Medical Therapy for Relief of Angina
Referenced studies that support the recommendations are  
summarized in the Online Data Supplement. 
COR LOE Recommendations 
1 B-R 1. In patients with CCD and angina, antianginal 
therapy with either a beta blocker, CCB, or long-
acting nitrate is recommended for relief of angina 
or equivalent symptoms.*1–3
1 B-R 2. In patients with CCD and angina who remain  
symptomatic after initial treatment, addition of a 
second antianginal agent from a different thera-
peutic class (beta blockers, CCB, long-acting 
nitrates) is recommended for relief of angina or 
equivalent symptoms.*3–6
1 B-R 3. In patients with CCD, ranolazine is recommended 
in patients who remain symptomatic despite  
treatment with beta blockers, CCB, or long- 
acting nitrate therapies.*7, 8
1 B-NR 4. In patients with CCD, sublingual nitroglycerin or 
nitroglycerin spray is recommended for immediate 
short-term relief of angina or equivalent symp-
toms.*9,10
3: Harm B-R 5. In patients with CCD and normal L V function, the 
addition of ivabradine to standard anti-anginal 
therapy is potentially harmful.*11
*Modified from the 2012 ACC/AHA Multisociety Guideline for the Diagnosis 
and Management of Patients With SIHD.12
Synopsis
Medical antianginal therapies for patients with CCD 
are understood to act via 2 general mechanisms: by 
decreasing myocardial oxygen demand or by increas-
ing myocardial arterial blood supply.9 Beta blockers, 
non-dihydropyridine CCBs, and ivabradine decrease 
myocardial oxygen demand (via decreasing contractil-ity, heart rate, or both) while nitrates and dihydropyri-
dine CCBs increase arterial oxygenated blood supply via 
vasodilatory actions. Ranolazine has a less well-defined 
mechanism of action, potentially by decreasing calcium  
overload through inhibition of the late sodium current. 
The overriding goal is to maximize relief of symptoms 
while choosing therapy that will not exacerbate comor-
bidities, will not have important interactions with con-
comitant medications and will be well tolerated. In the 
context of CCD antianginal therapy, the justification for 
their use rests fully on their effectiveness in relieving 
symptoms. Specific circumstances may justify choosing 
1 agent over another (eg, a beta blocker in a patient 
with concomitant L V dysfunction). Control of symptoms 
may be achieved by most patients, but full freedom from 
angina is only achieved in 40% to 50%, depending on 
anginal frequency at the onset of treatment.13
Recommendation-Specific Supportive Text
 1. Beta blockers have been considered the first anti-
anginal to use in patients with symptomatic CCD, 
although the evidence basis for this prioritization 
is not strong. Early randomized, placebo-controlled 
studies found that beta blockers increased the 
percentage of patients free of exertional angina, 
reduced anginal attacks and reduced nitroglycerin 
consumption.1,2 A meta-analysis of 72 studies com-
paring beta blockers with CCBs found fewer epi-
sodes of angina per week with beta blockers and 
lower rates of drug discontinuation.3 No difference 
was observed in the rate of death or MI between 
the 2 drug classes. A more recent meta-analysis 
including only larger studies comparing beta block-
ers with calcium channel blockers found no differ-
ence in the primary endpoint of exercise duration.4 
In randomized, placebo-controlled trials, CCBs 
effectively relieve angina, decrease nitroglycerin 
consumption, and increase exercise duration.14,15 
Long-acting nitrates decrease angina and improve 
exercise duration.16 Non-dihydropyridine CCBs 
(verapamil and diltiazem) can further depress L V 
function and should not be used in patients with 
CCD and significant L V dysfunction.17
 2. In patients with CCD and angina refractory to 1 agent, 
a combination with another antianginal agent improves 
symptom control.5 Non-dihydropyridine CCBs should 
be used with caution in patients on beta blockers 
because of the potential for synergistic induction or 
exacerbation of bradycardia and L V dysfunction. The 
addition of a long-acting nitrate to a beta blocker or 
a CCB improves exercise tolerance, reduces angina 
frequency and short-acting nitrate use.5
 3. Two randomized, placebo-controlled studies 
showed that the addition of ranolazine on the 
background of standard anti-anginal therapy 
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on November 12, 2025

CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINESAugust 29, 2023 Circulation. 2023;148:e9–e119. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000001168
Virani et al 2023 AHA/ACC/ACCP/ASPC/NLA/PCNA Chronic Coronary Disease Guideline e60improved anginal outcomes.7, 8 In the CARISA 
(Combination Assessment of Ranolazine in Stable 
Angina) trial, 823 patients with CCD were ran-
domized to placebo or 1 of 2 doses of ranolazine.7 
After 12 weeks of therapy, ranolazine improved 
exercise capacity and more effectively relieved 
angina compared with placebo. In the ERICA 
(Efficacy of Ranolazine in Chronic Angina) trial, 
565 patients with CCD and persistent symptoms 
despite a maximally tolerated dose of amlodipine 
were randomized to ranolazine or placebo.8 After 
6 weeks, patients randomized to ranolazine had 
significantly fewer anginal episodes and less nitro-
glycerin consumption.
 4. Short-acting nitrates help to relieve acute episodes 
of angina.9 One can decrease symptoms by admin-
istering a short-acting nitrate prior to activity that 
typically triggers symptoms. In randomized studies, 
nitroglycerin spray in comparison with a sublingual 
formulation is more effective and efficient at reliev-
ing angina, but with less headache.10
 5. The role of ivabradine in patients with CCD has 
not been studied as extensively as other antiangi-
nal therapies. One study comparing ivabradine with 
atenolol and another comparing it with amlodipine 
in a double-blind, randomized manner both found 
similar improvements in exercise time and angina 
relief with ivabradine.18,19 Another study found that 
the addition of ivabradine to atenolol in patients with 
CCD resulted in improved exercise capacity com-
pared with placebo.18 However, a more recent study 
randomized 19 102 patients with CCD, no evidence 
of HF, and a resting heart rate of at least 70 beats 
per minute to ivabradine or placebo in addition to 
GDMT, including standard anti-anginal treatment.11 
At approximately 28-month follow-up, the rate of 
the primary endpoint of cardiovascular death or MI 
was similar between both groups. In patients with 
activity-limiting angina, although ivabradine led to 
improvement in angina class in 24% compared 
with 18.8% receiving placebo (P =0.01), the primary 
endpoint of death or MI was significantly higher in 
the patients randomized to ivabradine (7 .6% versus 
6.5%; P=0.02), suggesting possible harm when 
ivabradine is used in this setting.
4.3.7. Management of Refractory Angina
Recommendation for Management of Refractory Angina
Referenced studies that support the recommendation are  
summarized in the Online Data Supplement. 
COR LOE Recommendation 
2b B-R 1. In patients with CCD, refractory angina, and no 
other treatment options, enhanced external coun-
terpulsation may be considered for relief of symp-
toms.*1
*Modified from the 2012 ACC/AHA Multisociety Guideline for the Diagnosis 
and Management of Patients With SIHD.2Synopsis
Refractory angina represents a small but important seg-
ment of the CCD population.3 Patients are identified by 
3 major features: (1) anginal chest pain (or equivalent 
symptoms) that is uncontrolled despite intensive medi-
cal therapy; (2) objective evidence the anginal symptoms 
have an ischemic cause; and (3) no further options for 
coronary revascularization.4 T ypically, symptoms produce 
major lifestyle limitations, functional status limitations, 
and disabilities. Some definitions also specify Canadian 
Cardiovascular Society Class III/IV symptoms. Some 
sources include patients with microvascular angina in 
this category. No AHA/ACC class 1 recommendations 
are possible given the limited evidence currently avail-
able in this area. Enhanced external counterpulsation has 
the weak support of a single randomized trial reported in 
2005, is FDA approved, but is very infrequently used.1,5 
Direct transmyocardial laser revascularization was stud-
ied in several RCTs and is FDA approved, but the largest 
trial of percutaneous transmyocardial laser revasculariza-
tion with a placebo/sham control did not show any ben-
efit and a possible signal of harm.6 Earlier unblinded trials 
examining surgical transmyocardial laser revasculariza-
tion reported a benefit in angina relief, but the operative 
mortality rate was in the range of 3% to 9%. The 2012 
ACC/AHA stable ischemic heart disease guideline as-
signed a Class 2b recommendation to transmyocardial 
laser revascularization. Based on a thorough review of 
this evidence, the writing committee feels a recommen-
dation is no longer warranted.7
Recommendation-Specific Supportive Text
 1. MUST-EECP (Multicenter Study of Enhanced 
External Counterpulsation) did not study refrac-
tory angina.1 This therapy has evolved for use in 
patients with no other options, but the evidence 
base supporting this shift is inadequate, consisting 
of observational studies and small RCTs. Enhanced 
external counterpulsation was a Class 2b recom-
mendation in the 2012 ACC/AHA stable ischemic 
heart disease guideline, and this was reaffirmed in 
the 2014 focused update.2,8 No interval data are 
available that warrant a change in this recommen-
dation. Enhanced external counterpulsation has 
limited availability and appears to be used primarily 
in patients who remain symptomatic and without 
other therapeutic options.
4.3.8. Chelation Therapy
Synopsis
Chelation therapy refers to the therapeutic use of intra-
venous infusions of disodium EDTA.1 Chelation has been 
used since the 1950s as a treatment for CCD, based 
until recently on anecdotal reports of benefit. EDTA avidly 
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on November 12, 2025

CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINESCirculation. 2023;148:e9–e119. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000001168 August 29, 2023
Virani et al 2023 AHA/ACC/ACCP/ASPC/NLA/PCNA Chronic Coronary Disease Guideline e61combines with biologically active heavy metal polyvalent 
cations, such as lead and cadmium, to form soluble com-
plexes that can then be excreted.1 Very small trials con-
ducted in patients with intermittent claudication and with 
CCD failed to show clinically relevant benefits.2–5 The 
first adequately powered trial of this intervention, TACT 
(Trial to Assess Chelation Therapy), randomized 1708 
patients with previous MI to 40 infusions of chelation or 
placebo.6 The primary composite endpoint of total mor-
tality, recurrent MI, stroke, coronary revascularization, or 
hospitalization for angina occurred in 222 (26%) patients 
in the chelation group and 261 (30%) patients in the 
placebo group (hazard ratio, 0.82 [95% CI, 0.69–0.99]; 
P=0.035). Among the 633 TACT patients with diabetes, 
chelation reduced the primary composite endpoint by 
41% reduction (hazard ratio, 0.59 [95% CI, 0.44–0.79]; 
P=0.02 for interaction).6,7 EDTA is currently not approved 
by the FDA for preventing or treating cardiovascular dis-
ease. TACT2 (Trial to Assess Chelation Therapy 2) has 
randomized 1000 patients with diabetes and previous MI 
using the same treatment regimen as TACT and will re-
port results in 2024.8
5. REVASCULARIZATION
The topic of revascularization is evolving. We highlight 
certain management decisions in the next section. Rec-
ommendations are typically based on results of the major 
trials, meta-analyses, or both, covering varying amounts 
of the same material. We acknowledge that the trials do 
not cover the area consistently or address all questions 
comprehensively. Some trials begin with angiographically 
proven CAD (and a decision already made to proceed 
with revascularization), while others begin earlier in the 
clinical presentation. With this in mind, we have made a 
concerted effort to stay within the strongest evidence in 
shaping these recommendations for revascularization in 
patients with CCD.
5.1. Revascularization
Recommendations for Revascularization
Referenced studies that support the recommendations are  
summarized in the Online Data Supplement. 
COR LOE Recommendations 
Goals of Revascularization
1 A 1. In patients with CCD and lifestyle-limiting 
angina despite GDMT and with significant 
coronary artery stenoses amenable to 
revascularization, revascularization is recom-
mended to improve symptoms.*1–7
1 B-R 2. In patients with CCD who have significant 
left main disease or multivessel disease 
with severe L V dysfunction (L VEF ≤ 35%), 
CABG in addition to medical therapy is rec-
ommended over medical therapy alone to 
improve survival.*8–11Cost Value 
Statement: 
Intermediate 
ValueB-NR 3. In patients with CCD and multivessel  
disease with severe L V dysfunction, CABG 
added to optimal medical therapy is of 
intermediate economic value compared with 
medical therapy alone.12
2a B-R 4. In patients with CCD and multivessel CAD 
appropriate for either CABG or PCI, revascu-
larization in addition to GDMT is reasonable  
to lower the risk of cardiovascular events  
such as spontaneous MI, unplanned urgent 
revascularizations, or cardiac death.*13–20
2a B-NR 5. In selected patients with CCD and  
significant left main stenosis for whom PCI 
can provide equivalent revascularization to 
that possible with CABG, PCI is reasonable 
to improve survival.*21
Decision-Making for Revascularization
1 A 6. In patients with CCD who have angina or an 
anginal equivalent, no previous evaluation for 
ischemia, and angiographically intermediate 
stenoses, the use of FFR or other proven 
nonhyperemic pressure ratios (eg, iFR) 
is recommended before proceeding with 
PCI.*2,22,23
Cost Value 
Statement: 
High ValueB-NR 7 . In patients with CCD undergoing coronary 
angiography without previous stress testing, 
the use of invasive FFR to evaluate angio-
graphically intermediate coronary stenoses 
before proceeding with PCI is a high eco-
nomic value intervention.24,25
1 B-NR 8. In patients with CCD with complex 3-vessel 
disease or for whom the optimal treatment 
strategy is unclear, a Heart Team approach  
that includes representatives from interven-
tional cardiology and cardiac surgery is recom-
mended to improve patient outcomes.*26–29
*Modified from the 2021 ACC/AHA/SCAI Guideline for Coronary Artery Re-
vascularization.30
Synopsis
The management of patients with CCD and stable an-
gina is 3-fold: relief of symptoms, prevention of nonfa-
tal events such as MI, and improving long-term survival. 
Medical therapy is often an effective option for these 
patients. However, revascularization results in a greater 
improvement in angina and QOL than does medical 
therapy alone. Similarly, revascularization among appro-
priate patients with CCD lowers the risk of cardiovas-
cular death, MI and urgent revascularization, particularly 
among patients with multivessel disease.2,13,15,31 Howev-
er, the effect of revascularization on improving survival in 
patients with CCD is more nuanced.32 Overall, multiple 
studies and subsequent meta-analyses have confirmed 
an overall null effect of revascularization on all-cause 
death for CCD, with few exceptions.15,19,33 Of note, pa-
tients in those studies tended to have a low atheroscle-
rotic burden. Predictors of survival include anatomic and 
functional severity of the disease, L V function, and co-
morbidities such as diabetes and renal dysfunction.33 For Recommendations for Revascularization (Continued )
COR LOE Recommendations 
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on November 12, 2025

CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINESAugust 29, 2023 Circulation. 2023;148:e9–e119. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000001168
Virani et al 2023 AHA/ACC/ACCP/ASPC/NLA/PCNA Chronic Coronary Disease Guideline e62patients with CCD and L V dysfunction (particularly when 
L VEF is ≤35%) and for patients with left main disease, 
CABG has been shown to be superior to medical therapy 
alone for improving survival.8,10,11
Recommendation-Specific Supportive Text
 1. In the COURAGE trial, patients initially random-
ized to GDMT who crossed over to early revas-
cularization had worse baseline Seattle Angina 
Questionnaire scores. When compared with 
patients who were randomized to PCI, these 
patients experienced worse health status over the 
initial year of treatment and more unstable angina 
admissions.6 In the ISCHEMIA trial, the Seattle 
Angina Questionnaire summary scores were higher 
with an invasive strategy compared with a conser-
vative strategy and sustained over 36 months of 
follow-up. Seattle Angina Questionnaire improve-
ments were more pronounced among patients 
with greater frequency of baseline angina (daily/
weekly > monthly > none). Similarly, the probability 
of being angina-free was greater among partici-
pants who had angina at baseline but was mini-
mal among those who were asymptomatic before 
randomization.1 In the ORBITA trial, PCI objectively 
reduced ischemia (assessed by dobutamine stress 
echocardiography), and although Seattle Angina 
Questionnaire scores did not differ among par-
ticipants, PCI resulted in more patient-reported 
freedom from angina than placebo. Patients with 
greater ischemia burdens were more likely to 
have lower angina frequency score and freedom 
from angina with PCI than with the sham proce-
dure.7 In a pooled analysis of FAME (Fractional 
Flow Reserve Versus Angiography for Multivessel 
Evaluation) and FAME-2 (Fractional Flow Reserve 
Guided Percutaneous Coronary Intervention Plus 
Optimal Medical Treatment [OMT] Versus OMT), 
patients with lower FFR, greater improvement in 
FFR post-PCI and higher angina class at baseline 
were associated with the greatest magnitude of 
QOL improvement at 1 month and 1 year.34
 2. Although older studies suggested a mortality ben-
efit with surgical revascularization, many recent 
studies and meta-analyses point to an overall null 
effect of revascularization on all-cause death for 
CCD.15,19,33,35 Important reasons include advances 
in medical management and a lower mortality rate 
with CCD in the contemporary era. For example, the 
annualized mortality rate in the medical therapy arm 
of ACME-2 (Angioplasty Compared to Medicine: 
Two-Vessel Disease) was 4.0%, but 1.0% in 
FAME-2 and 1.6% in ISCHEMIA.33 However, many 
of these trials also had high rates of crossover, and 
many patients had low angiographic complexity. Numerous technical advances in the field of revas-
cularization also have occurred for CABG and 
PCI since some of these earlier trials were con-
ducted.8,36,37 Two subgroups with mortality benefit 
of CABG over GDMT alone are patients with mul-
tivessel disease and moderate to severe L V dys-
function (ejection fraction ≤35%), and those with 
left main disease, both of which may occur concur-
rently.38 In the STICH trial, patients with ischemic 
cardiomyopathy and reduced L VEF (≤35%) who 
received CABG in addition to optimal medical ther-
apy had improved survival at 10 years compared 
with patients who received medical therapy alone.11 
In the REVIVED-BCIS 2 trial (Revascularization for 
Ischemic Ventricular Dysfunction: a Randomized 
Comparison of PCI [with Optimal Medical Therapy] 
Versus Optimal Medical Therapy Alone for 
Treatment of HF Secondary to Coronary Disease), 
PCI among patients with ejection fraction ≤35% 
did not improve MACE including survival at a 
median follow-up of 3.4 years.39 For patients with 
left main disease, the focus has been on compar-
ing CABG and PCI in recent years; no recent tri-
als are available that compare revascularization to 
GDMT alone for this indication. Further, most of the 
contemporary CCD trials have excluded patients 
with left main disease. Accordingly, the evidence 
to support revascularization is derived mainly from 
older RCTs, and no new data refute this evidence.8
 3. Using data from the STICH trial, a decision-analytic 
patient-level simulation model was developed to 
estimate the lifetime costs (in 2019 US dollars) and 
benefits (in QAL Ys) of CABG for ischemic cardio-
myopathy from the US healthcare sector perspec-
tive and the lifetime analytic horizon. In this analysis, 
patients receiving CABG arm accrued 6.53 lifetime 
QAL Ys (95% CI, 5.70–7 .53) and a lifetime cost 
of $140 059 (95% CI, $106 401–$180 992). 
In comparison, patients receiving medical ther-
apy alone accrued 5.52 lifetime QAL Ys (95% CI, 
5.06–6.09) and $74 894 lifetime cost (95% CI, 
$58 372–$93 541). Thus, the incremental cost-
effectiveness ratio for CABG compared with medi-
cal therapy alone was $63 989 per QAL Y gained, 
with 87% of the simulations producing incremen-
tal cost-effectiveness ratios ≤$100 000 per QAL Y 
gained. Thus, in patients with ischemic cardiomyop-
athy and reduced L V function, CABG has interme-
diate economic value ($50 000–$150 000/QAL Y 
gained) compared with medical therapy alone from 
the US healthcare sector perspective.12
 4. Clinical events such as nonfatal MI, unstable 
angina, and urgent revascularization are impor-
tant for patients from a prognostic and a QOL 
perspective. Nonfatal MI rates appear to corre-
late with ischemia severity.40 Some ambiguity has 
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on November 12, 2025

CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINESCirculation. 2023;148:e9–e119. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000001168 August 29, 2023
Virani et al 2023 AHA/ACC/ACCP/ASPC/NLA/PCNA Chronic Coronary Disease Guideline e63been observed about the impact of revasculariza-
tion on these clinical events. In MASS II (Medicine, 
Angioplasty, or Surgery Study), the 10-year rates 
of cardiac death were lower after CABG or PCI 
than after medical therapy alone.14 In ISCHEMIA, 
revascularization had a null effect on cardiovas-
cular death and MI at 4 years overall, with a ben-
efit noted among patients with most severe CAD 
(3-vessel severe stenosis [≥70%] or 2-vessel 
severe stenosis with proximal left anterior descend-
ing artery).40,41 At 7-year follow-up, a reduction in 
cardiovascular mortality with revascularization was 
observed.35 Moreover, in the ISCHEMIA trial, the 
incidence of procedural type 4a or type 5 MIs was 
increased with revascularization (20.1% of all MIs 
in the trial), but the incidence of late MI (sponta-
neous MI [type 1]), demand-induced MI (type 2), 
or MIs associated with stent thrombosis (type 4b) 
or with restenosis (4c) was reduced. A spontane-
ous MI was associated with a 2.4-fold increased 
hazard for all-cause death and a 3.4-fold increased 
hazard for cardiovascular mortality compared with 
no MI, whereas a procedural MI was not associated 
with all-cause or cardiovascular death.16 A contem-
porary meta-analysis of patients with CCD noted 
a reduction in cardiac death and spontaneous MI 
with revascularization compared with medical ther-
apy alone. On meta-regression, cardiac death risk 
reduction was linearly associated with reductions 
in spontaneous MI and percentage of multivessel 
disease at baseline.15 Another contemporary meta-
analysis confirmed a reduction in spontaneous MI 
with revascularization, but also noted an increase in 
procedural MI, with no improvement for MI overall 
with revascularization.33 However, revascularization 
reduced unstable angina (particularly among con-
temporary stent era trials) and unplanned revascu-
larization in this and other meta-analyses.19
 5. There are no RCTs directly comparing PCI to medi-
cal therapy for the treatment of left main disease. 
Most of the recent trials have focused on CABG 
versus PCI.42–45 Data from these trials and from 
subsequent meta-analyses suggest that patients 
with low-to-medium anatomic complexity left main 
disease that is equally suitable for surgical or per-
cutaneous revascularization and predominantly 
with normal ejection fraction have similar survival 
with PCI and CABG 42,46–51 In addition, several reg-
istry studies have reported a survival advantage of 
PCI over medical therapy in patients with left main 
CAD,52 particularly using contemporary DES and 
PCI techniques.53–55 A network meta-analysis of 19 
studies found that the survival advantage for PCI 
over medical therapy in patients with left main CAD 
was similar to the survival advantage for CABG 
over medical therapy.21 6. In FAME-2, among patients with CCD, FFR-guided 
PCI (FFR, ≤ 0.8) of lesions ≥ 50% angiographic sever-
ity was superior to medical therapy alone in reduc-
ing the primary MACE endpoint, primarily driven by 
a reduction in the need for urgent revasculariza-
tion.31 This benefit appeared to be sustained over 
5 years of follow-up.2 FFR-guided PCI is also supe-
rior to angiography-guided PCI for reducing MACE 
rates among patients with multivessel CAD.23 More 
recently, iFR-guided PCI has been shown to be non-
inferior to FFR-guided PCI.22,56 iFR can be accom-
plished with shorter procedure times compared with 
FFR. Patients with FFR >0.8 or iFR >0.89 appear to 
have low event rates with medical therapy alone.57 ,58 
Several other nonhyperemic pressure ratios, both 
wire-and angiography-based, have been developed 
and are undergoing further evaluation.59
 7 . In an economic evaluation of the FAME-2 trial 
(888 patients with stable single-vessel or multives-
sel coronary artery disease with reduced fractional 
flow reserve, randomly assigned to PCI plus medi-
cal therapy or medical therapy alone), mean initial 
costs were higher in the PCI group ($9944 ver-
sus $4440; P <0.001) but by 3 years were similar 
between the 2 groups ($16 792 versus $16 737; 
P=0.94).60 The incremental cost-effectiveness ratio 
for PCI plus medical therapy compared with medical 
therapy alone was $17 300 per QAL Y gained at 2 
years and $1600 per QAL Y gained at 3 years. Thus, 
the use of FFR in this context is a high economic 
value intervention (incremental cost-effectiveness 
ratio <$50 000 per QAL Y gained). These findings 
were robust in sensitivity analyses. This suggested 
that FFR-guided PCI of lesions is economically 
attractive compared with medical therapy alone 
in patients with stable coronary artery disease. 
Further, iFR has been shown to be noninferior to 
FFR, with economic evaluations suggesting that it 
has lower procedural costs.61 Thus, the use of iFR-
guided PCI is also likely to be a high value interven-
tion (<$50 000/QAL Y gained) in this context.
 8. A multidisciplinary Heart Team, involving an inter-
ventional cardiologist, cardiac surgeon, and other 
cardiovascular specialists, has become a critical 
component of the revascularization decision. Ideal 
situations for Heart Team consideration include 
patients with complex coronary disease/multi-
vessel disease, comorbid conditions that could 
impact the success of the revascularization strat-
egy, and other clinical or social situations that may 
impact outcomes. Treatment decisions should be 
patient-centered, incorporate patient preferences 
and goals, and include shared decision-making 
between the clinicians and the patients. For exam-
ple, there may be patients who may prefer revascu-
larization even if not on GDMT.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on November 12, 2025

CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINESAugust 29, 2023 Circulation. 2023;148:e9–e119. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000001168
Virani et al 2023 AHA/ACC/ACCP/ASPC/NLA/PCNA Chronic Coronary Disease Guideline e645.2. Revascularization: PCI Versus CABG
Recommendations for Revascularization: PCI Versus CABG
Referenced studies that support the recommendations are  
summarized in the Online Data Supplement. 
COR LOE Recommendations 
Patients With CCD
1 B-R 1. In patients with CCD who require revascularization 
for significant left main involvement associated 
with high-complexity CAD, CABG is recommended 
in preference to PCI to improve survival.*1,2
2a B-R 2. In patients with CCD who require revasculariza-
tion for multivessel CAD with complex and diffuse 
CAD (eg, SYNTAX score >33), it is reasonable to 
choose CABG over PCI to improve survival.*1,3–6
Patients With CCD at High Surgical Risk
2a B-NR 3. In patients with CCD who are appropriate for 
revascularization but poor candidates for surgery, it 
is reasonable to choose PCI over CABG to improve 
symptoms and reduce MACE.7–9
Patients With CCD and Diabetes
1 A 4. In patients with CCD, diabetes, and multivessel 
CAD with involvement of the left anterior descend-
ing artery who are appropriate candidates for 
CABG, CABG (with a left internal mammary artery 
to the left anterior descending artery) is recom-
mended in preference to PCI to reduce mortality 
and repeat revascularizations.*5,10–17
2b B-R 5. In patients with CCD and diabetes who have left 
main stenosis and low- or intermediate-complexity 
CAD (eg, SYNTAX score ≤33), PCI may be 
considered as an alternative to CABG to reduce 
MACE.*10,18
*Modified from the 2021 ACC/AHA/SCAI Guideline for Coronary Artery Re-
vascularization.19
Synopsis
There are fundamental differences between how CABG 
and PCI restore blood flow to ischemic myocardium.20 In 
CABG, bypass grafts deliver blood beyond the proximal 
coronary segments that are usually diseased and are at 
risk for development of de novo lesions. Thus, in addi-
tion to the immediate benefit of CABG in treating exist-
ing lesions, CABG could offer future protection against 
ischemic insults by furnishing an alternative route for 
blood that is unhindered by upstream native CAD. The 
field protection is unique to CABG because PCI only 
treats the coronary segment where the stent is implant-
ed with no prophylactic potential. Improved outcomes 
associated with CABG are largely driven by a reduction 
in spontaneous MI and repeat revascularization com-
pared with PCI.3,15,21–24 However, certain subgroups of 
patients derive a survival benefit from CABG compared 
with PCI,1,2,4,25 including patients with complex or diffuse 
coronary disease and those with diabetes. Although the 
evidence for the recommendations is based on studies 
that included predominantly patients with CCD, some 
studies incorporated patients with unstable or acute coronary ischemia. The choice of revascularization ther-
apy should be guided by Heart Team deliberations and 
shared decision-making (Section 4.1.3) in the context 
of available evidence and the patient’s specific risk pro-
file and life expectancy.
Recommendation-Specific Supportive Text
 1. The SYNTAX (Synergy Between PCI With TAXUS 
and Cardiac Surgery) trial showed a significantly 
higher MACE and cardiac mortality rate at 5 years 
for the subgroup of patients with left main and 
high-complexity disease (defined as a SYNTAX 
score >33) who were treated with PCI.1 Other 
RCTs that compared revascularization strategies in 
patients with left main disease excluded patients 
with complex disease.20-22,26
 2. The 10-year follow-up of the SYNTAX trial found 
a 40% higher mortality rate with PCI compared 
with CABG in the group of patients with triple-
vessel disease.4 In a pooled analysis of individual 
data of 11  518 patients from 11 RCTs, Head et 
al showed a mortality benefit with CABG over 
PCI in patients with multivessel disease.5 The 
SYNTAX score was a significant modifier of 
treatment effect, with higher scores (≥ 33) favor-
ing CABG.5
 3. In a subgroup analysis of the 10-year follow-up 
of the SYNTAX trial comparing PCI with CABG in 
patients with left main CAD, triple-vessel disease, 
or both, preprocedural physical and mental health 
status was an important modifier of the relative 
treatment effects of the 2 different revasculariza-
tion approaches. Among patients with low Physical 
Component Summary (PCS) scores, low Mental 
Component Summary (MCS) scores, or both, no 
significant difference was seen in the 10-year 
mortality rate between PCI and CABG.7 Of the 
3075 patients who were treated in the SYNTAX 
trial, 198 (6.4%) and 1077 (35.0%) patients were 
included in PCI and CABG registries, respectively. 
The main reason for inclusion in the CABG registry 
was too complex coronary anatomy, while the main 
reason for inclusion in the PCI registry was too 
high risk for surgery (70.7%).8 In the OPTIMUM 
(Outcomes of Percutaneous RevascularizaTIon for 
Management of SUrgically Ineligible Patients with 
Multivessel or Left Main Coronary Artery Disease) 
registry, patients undergoing PCI (n=726) had 
complex clinical profiles that were incompletely 
represented by surgical prediction models. Poor 
distal targets or conduits (18.9%), severe L V 
dysfunction and nonviable myocardium (16.8%), 
severe lung disease (10.1%), and frailty or immo-
bility (9.7%) were among the top reasons for 
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on November 12, 2025

CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINESCirculation. 2023;148:e9–e119. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000001168 August 29, 2023
Virani et al 2023 AHA/ACC/ACCP/ASPC/NLA/PCNA Chronic Coronary Disease Guideline e65surgical ineligibility. PCI was associated with sig-
nificant improvements in patients’ symptom bur-
den, physical function, and QOL. 9
 4. The FREEDOM (Revascularization in Diabetics 
with Multivessel Disease) trial (n=1900) com-
pared CABG with PCI in patients with diabe-
tes and multivessel CAD.10,11 The trial excluded 
patients with significant left main stenosis. Of 
the enrolled patients, 82% in the PCI group and 
85% in the CABG group had triple-vessel disease, 
and 91% of patients had left anterior descending 
artery involvement. At 5-year follow-up, all-cause 
death rate was higher in the PCI group than in the 
CABG group. In the FREEDOM follow-up study, 
all-cause death rate up to 8 years continued to 
be significantly higher with PCI (hazard ratio, 1.36 
[95% CI, 1.07-1.74]).11 The Head et al meta-anal-
ysis showed consistent results, with a nearly 50% 
increase in 5-year mortality risk among patients 
with diabetes who were treated with PCI than 
among those treated with CABG.5 A patient-level 
pooled analysis of 3 trials associated CABG with 
a reduction in the composite primary endpoint of 
death, MI, or stroke and the individual components 
of the endpoint except for stroke.17
 5. To date, no RCTs have compared revasculariza-
tion strategies that focus exclusively on patients 
with diabetes with stable left main CAD. In a 
prespecified subgroup analysis of the EXCEL 
(Evaluation of XIENCE versus CABG Surgery 
for Effectiveness of Left Main Revascularization) 
trial, which included patients with left main CAD, 
predominantly normal ejection fraction, and low- 
or intermediate-complexity CAD,27 no difference 
was observed in the primary endpoint composite 
of death, stroke, or MI for PCI and CABG among 
patients with or without diabetes.18 However, all-
cause death at 3 years occurred in 13.6% of 
patients with diabetes treated with PCI and 8.0% 
of patients treated with CABG (P =0.046). No 
difference in the mortality rate was seen among 
patients without diabetes (5.5% versus 5.0% 
among patients treated with PCI and CABG, 
respectively; P=0.71).
6. SPECIAL POPULATIONS
In these sections, recommendations are highlighted for 
populations that are unique, either based on comor-
bidities, life stage, or mechanism of coronary pathol-
ogy or pathophysiology. Unless modified or otherwise 
specified, the preceding recommendations for patients 
with CCD generally apply to these “special” popula-
tions. In some sections, additional recommendations 
that are unique to the populations being discussed are 
provided.6.1. Existing Heart Diseases and Conditions
6.1.1. Chronic Management After SCAD
Recommendations for Chronic Management After SCAD
Referenced studies that support the recommendations are  
summarized in the Online Data Supplement. 
COR LOE Recommendations 
1 C-LD 1. In patients with CCD who have experienced 
SCAD, counseling should be provided regard-
ing potential triggers and risk of SCAD recur-
rence.1–12
2a C-LD 2. In patients with CCD who have experienced SCAD, 
evaluation for underlying vasculopathies is reason-
able to identify abnormalities in other vascular 
beds.1–4,7 ,10,13–15
2b C-LD 3. In patients with CCD who have experienced SCAD, 
beta-blocker therapy may be reasonable to reduce 
the incidence of recurrent SCAD.1
Synopsis
SCAD is an underrecognized cause of MI.16,17 SCAD 
is more common among women than men and occurs 
predominantly in younger women with low burden 
of classic risk factors for ASCVD. Triggers include 
pregnancy, vigorous physical exertion, and severe 
emotional distress.16,17 SCAD may be a manifesta-
tion of an underlying arteriopathy.1,13,16,17 Pregnancy-
associated SCAD has a worse prognosis than SCAD 
in the absence of pregnancy.1,12,16,17 Conservative 
medical management of the acute event is favored, 
but selected unstable patients may require percuta-
neous or surgical revascularization.16,17 Medical care 
after SCAD is focused on managing sequelae of the 
acute event, evaluation and treatment of recurrent 
symptoms, and prevention of recurrent SCAD. In the 
absence of specific data among patients with SCAD, 
DAPT among those who have undergone stenting 
should follow current guidelines for DAPT (Section 
4.3.1, “Antiplatelet Therapy and Oral Anticoagulants”), 
while being aware that excess uterine bleeding in pre-
menopausal women may require treatment.1,2 Man-
agement of L V dysfunction after the ischemic insult 
is addressed in Section 4.3.2, “Beta Blockers,” Sec-
tion 4.3.3, “Renin-Angiotensin-Aldosterone Inhibitors,” 
and Section 6.1.2 “INOCA.” Observational data sug-
gest benefits of CR18–21 and beta blockade.1 CR is 
addressed in Section 4.2.10.
Recommendation-Specific Supportive Text
 1. SCAD recurrence can be attributable to extension 
of the initial dissection or attributable to a new dis-
section. Recurrence rates are highest early after 
the initial dissection but can occur years later.2,22 
Reported recurrence rates of SCAD vary widely 
depending on participant characteristics, defini-
tion of recurrent SCAD, and length of follow-up, 
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on November 12, 2025

CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINESAugust 29, 2023 Circulation. 2023;148:e9–e119. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000001168
Virani et al 2023 AHA/ACC/ACCP/ASPC/NLA/PCNA Chronic Coronary Disease Guideline e66ranging from 0% to 26.9% at 1 year and esti-
mated 5-year Kaplan-Meier rates up to 27%.1-3,5–9 
Similar to incident SCAD, recurrent SCAD may 
be triggered by intense physical exertion or psy-
chosocial distress. Recurrent SCAD may be more common among patients with highly tortuous 
coronary arteries, underlying fibromuscular dys-
plasia, history of migraine headaches, and hyper-
tension.1,4,10,11 Pregnancy in women with previous 
SCAD was not associated with recurrent SCAD in 
multivariable modeling that controlled for age at 
first SCAD, year of first SCAD, and history of fibro-
muscular dysplasia.12
 2. Multiple studies have reported a high prevalence 
of extracoronary vascular abnormalities (eg, 
cerebral aneurysms, pseudoaneurysms) and 
concomitant fibromuscular dysplasia among 
patients with SCAD. The true prevalence of 
these disorders is unclear because reports are 
based on screening rates between 30% and 
80%.1-4,7 ,10,13–15 Table 14 lists screening ques-
tions that may point toward an underlying vas-
culopathy and, together with a detailed vascular 
physical examination, may facilitate a patient-
clinician discussion about benefits and risks of 
imaging extracoronary vascular beds.16 Although 
some cerebral aneurysms detected by screen-
ing have been large enough to warrant interven-
tion, no studies to date show that screening for 
underlying arteriopathies changes patient treat-
ment or patient outcomes.
 3. No randomized trials exist of pharmacological man-
agement after SCAD. Using multivariable mod-
eling, a Canadian prospective follow-up study of 
327 patients with SCAD found that use of beta 
blockade was associated with a 64% reduction 
in recurrent SCAD.1 Given the pathophysiol-
ogy of SCAD, statin therapy is not indicated for 
SCAD but should be continued for patients who 
qualify for statin therapy based on global car-
diovascular risk or inherited disorders like FH.17 
Patients who received a stent during their acute 
hospitalization for SCAD should continue DAPT 
(see Section 4.3.1, “Antiplatelet Therapy and 
Oral Anticoagulants”) in the outpatient setting.17 
Several prospective registries and a random-
ized trial are underway to improve understand-
ing of the natural history of SCAD and potential 
treatments.23,24
6.1.2. Ischemia With Nonobstructive Coronary 
Arteries
Recommendation for INOCA
Referenced studies that support the recommendation are  
summarized in the Online Data Supplement. 
COR LOE Recommendation 
2a B-R 1. In symptomatic patients with nonobstructive 
CAD, a strategy of stratified medical therapy* 
guided by invasive coronary physiologic testing 
can be useful for improving angina severity and 
QOL.1,2
*See recommendation-specific supportive text for details.Table 14. Screening Questions for SCAD-Associated  
Arteriopathies and Connective Tissue Disorders
Personal history (Have you ever been diagnosed with or  
experienced any of the following?)
Early-onset hypertension
Stroke or transient ischemic attack
Pulsatile tinnitus
Migraine headaches
Renal infarction
Subarachnoid hemorrhage
Aneurysm (aortic, peripheral, brain)
Dissection (aortic, peripheral)
Rupture of hollow organs (intestinal, bladder, uterine)
Pneumothorax
Tendon or muscle rupture
Joint dislocation
Talipes equinovarus (clubfoot)
Umbilical or inguinal hernia
Scoliosis or pectus deformity
Pregnancy complications (cervical incompetence, hemorrhage, uterine  
prolapse, hypertension)
Poor wound healing
Ectopia lentis
Myopia
Detached retina, early glaucoma, or early cataracts
Tall stature
Abnormality of cardiac valve
Systemic inflammatory disease
Family history (Does anyone in your family have the following?)
Dissection (coronary, aortic, peripheral)
Inherited arteriopathy or connective tissue disorder (eg, vascular  
Ehlers-Danlos syndrome, Marfan syndrome, Loeys-Dietz syndrome)
Early stroke, early myocardial infarction, sudden cardiac death
Review of systems (Are you currently experiencing any of the  
following?)
Headaches
Pulsatile tinnitus
Postprandial abdominal pain
Flank pain
Claudication
Easy bruising
Joint hypermobility or laxity
SCAD indicates spontaneous coronary artery dissection.
Reprinted with permission from Hayes SN, et al.16 Copyright 2007 American 
Heart Association, Inc.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on November 12, 2025

CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINESCirculation. 2023;148:e9–e119. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000001168 August 29, 2023
Virani et al 2023 AHA/ACC/ACCP/ASPC/NLA/PCNA Chronic Coronary Disease Guideline e67Synopsis
Nonobstructive CAD is present in >50% of patients 
undergoing elective coronary angiography and is as-
sociated with an increased risk of all-cause death and 
MI.3–5 INOCA refers to myocardial ischemia caused by 
coronary vasomotor dysfunction without obstructive 
CAD.6 In INOCA, the myocardial oxygen supply-demand 
mismatch may be caused by coronary microvascular 
dysfunction, coronary vasospasm, or both. Microvascu-
lar angina is the clinical manifestation of coronary mi-
crovascular dysfunction, and vasospastic angina is the 
clinical manifestation of myocardial ischemia caused 
by dynamic epicardial coronary obstruction caused by 
a vasomotor disorder. Table 15 outlines the diagnostic 
criteria for microvascular angina proposed by COVADIS 
(Coronary Vasomotion Disorders International Study 
Group).7 The criteria used to diagnose vasospastic an-
gina are outlined in Table 16.8 For nonobstructive CAD 
imaging recommendations, see Section 3.1. (“Diagnos-
tic Evaluation”) of this guideline and the 2021 AHA/
ACC chest pain guideline.9 The CorMicA (Coronary Mi-
crovascular Angina) trial showed that in patients with 
persistent stable chest pain and nonobstructive CAD, 
invasive coronary physiology testing is feasible and 
safe, with clear diagnostic use in identifying specific 
INOCA endotypes.1
Recommendation-Specific Supportive Text
 1. In the CorMicA trial, a stratified medical therapy 
approach guided by invasive coronary physiology 
testing (guidewire-based assessment of coronary 
flow reserve index of microvascular resistance 
[IMR], and FFR), followed by vasoreactivity test-
ing with acetylcholine improved angina severity 
and QOL in patients with INOCA (<50% diameter 
reduction or FFR >0.80).1,2 Based on the results of testing in the intervention arm (vasospastic 
angina versus microvascular angina), patients were 
stratified to medical therapy, as shown in Table 
1 7.1 Patients with noncardiac chest pain were dis-
charged from the cardiology clinic and antianginal 
medications were discontinued. At 6 months, the 
intervention resulted in improvement of 11.7 units 
in the Seattle Angina Questionnaire summary 
score, as well as improvement in QOL, as assessed 
by the EuroQoL (EQ-5D-5L).1 No differences were 
observed in MACE between the intervention and 
control arms at 6-month follow-up. The improve-
ments in angina severity and QOL were sustained 
at 1-year follow-up.2Table 15. Clinical Criteria for Suspecting Microvascular Angina*
Criteria Evidence Diagnostic Parameters 
1 Symptoms of myocardial ischemia Effort or rest angina; exertional dyspnea
2 Absence of obstructive CAD (<50%  
diameter reduction or FFR >0.80)Coronary CTA; invasive coronary angiography
3 Objective evidence of myocardial 
ischemiaIschemic changes on ECG during an episode of chest pain; stress-induced chest pain and/or ischemic 
changes on ECG in the presence or absence of transient/reversible abnormal myocardial perfusion and/
or wall motion abnormality
4 Evidence of impaired coronary  
microvascular functionImpaired coronary flow reserve (cut-off value depending on methodology between ≤ 0.20 and ≤ 0.25); 
coronary microvascular spasm, defined as reproduction of symptoms, ischemic shifts on ECG but no  
epicardial spasm during acetylcholine testing; abnormal coronary microvascular resistance indices  
(eg, IMR >25); coronary slow flow phenomenon, defined as TIMI frame count >25
Suspected microvascular angina is diagnosed if symptoms of ischemia are present (criteria 1) with no obstructive CAD (criteria 2) but only (a) objective evidence of 
myocardial ischemia (criteria 3) or (b) evidence of impaired coronary microvascular function (criteria 4) alone.
*Definitive microvascular angina is only diagnosed if all 4 criteria are present for a diagnosis of microvascular angina.
CAD indicates coronary artery disease; CFR, coronary flow reserve; CTA, computed tomographic angiography; ECG, electrocardiogram; FFR, fractional flow reserve; 
and IMR, index of microcirculatory resistance.
Adapted with permission from Ong P, et al.7 Copyright 2018, with permission from Elsevier.
Table 16. Diagnostic Criteria for Vasospastic Angina
Nitrate-responsive angina: during spontaneous episode, with at least 1 
of the following:
 Rest angina, especially between night and early morning
 Marked diurnal variation in exercise tolerance, reduced in morning
 Hyperventilation can precipitate an episode
 Calcium channel blockers (not beta blockers) suppress episodes
Transient ischemic electrocardiographic changes: during spontaneous 
episode, including any of the following in at least 2 contiguous leads:
 ST segment elevation ≥0.1 mV
 ST segment depression ≥0.1 mV
 New negative U waves
Coronary artery spasm: defined as transient total or subtotal  
coronary artery occlusion (>90% constriction) with angina and ischemic 
electrocardiographic changes either spontaneously or in response to  
a provocative stimulus (typically acetylcholine, ergot, or hyperventilation)
“Definitive” vasospastic angina is diagnosed if nitrate-responsive angina is 
evident during spontaneous episodes and either the transient ischemic ECG 
changed during the spontaneous episodes or coronary artery spasm criteria 
are fulfilled. “Suspected” vasospastic angina is diagnosed if nitrate-responsive 
angina is evident during spontaneous episodes but transient ischemic electro-
cardiographic changes are equivocal or unavailable and coronary artery spasm 
criteria are equivocal.
ECG indicates electrocardiogram. 
Modified from Beltrame JF, et al.8 by permission of Oxford University Press, 
copyright 2017; and by permission of The Author, copyright 2015.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on November 12, 2025

CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINESAugust 29, 2023 Circulation. 2023;148:e9–e119. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000001168
Virani et al 2023 AHA/ACC/ACCP/ASPC/NLA/PCNA Chronic Coronary Disease Guideline e686.1.3. HF With Preserved or Reduced Ejection 
Fraction
Synopsis
CAD is the most common cause of HF in the United States 
and has a pivotal role in the development and progres-
sion of both HF with preserved ejection fraction and HF  
with reduced ejection fraction.1,2 Management of patients 
with CCD and HF with preserved ejection fraction and 
HF with reduced ejection fraction should follow associ-
ated guideline recommendations for revascularization3 
and HF,4,5 as well as sections in this guideline: Section 4.2, “Guideline-Directed Management and Therapy,” Section 
4.3, “Medical Therapy to Prevent Cardiovascular Events 
and Manage Symptoms,” and Section 5, “Revascularization.”
6.2. CCD With Valvular Heart Disease
Synopsis
Concurrent CCD is common in patients with valvular heart 
disease.1,2 The evaluation and management of CCD at the 
time of valve intervention is discussed in the “2021 ACC/
AHA Guideline for the Management of Patients With Val-
vular Heart Disease.”3 After valve intervention, patients Table 17. Invasive Coronary Function Testing Definition and Linked Pharmacotherapy for INOCA Endotypes
Endotype Disorder of Coronary Artery Function Linked Pharmacotherapy 
Microvascular  
angina   
(nonobstructive CAD 
and proven CMD)↑  Microvascular 
resistance
↓  Coronary  
vasorelaxation
↓  Microvasodilator 
capacity
    Microvascular 
spasmIMR ≥25.
IMR is a quantitative method for specifically assessing  
microvascular function independent resting hemodynamics.
IMR is distal coronary pressure* transmit time (average 
time for 3 saline bolus runs at hyperemia).
CFR by thermodilution <2.0.
This reflects the inability to increase coronary flow above 2 
times the resting flow.
Resistive reserve ratio <2.0.
This reflects the vasodilator capacity of the  
microcirculation to change from baseline to hyperemia  
(resistance at rest divided by resistance at hyperemia).
Angina during acetylcholine infusion or bolus with typical 
ischemic ST-segment changes and epicardial coronary 
constriction <90% reduction in epicardial coronary artery 
diameter. Represents inappropriate susceptibility  
microvascular constriction.Baseline therapy: Consider aspirin, statin, 
and ACEi therapy in all patients. Sublingual 
nitroglycerin as needed.
Smoking cessation and lifestyle changes.
Antianginal Rx
First line: Beta blocker (eg, carvedilol 6.25 
mg BID uptitrated)
Second line: CCB substituted (non DHP [eg, 
verapamil 40 mg BID titrated]) where beta 
blockers are not tolerated or ineffective.
Third line: Add-in therapy
CCB-DHP (eg, amlodipine)-only for those on 
beta blockers
Nicorandil* (5 mg BID, uptitrated)
Ranolazine (375 mg BID, uptitrated)
Vasospastic angina Epicardial spasm Epicardial coronary artery spasm is defined as reduction in 
coronary diameter >90% after intracoronary acetylcholine 
in comparison with baseline resting condition after intra-
coronary glyceryl trinitrate (nitroglycerin) administration 
in any epicardial coronary artery segment together with 
symptoms and ST-segment deviation on the ECG.Baseline therapy: If atherosclerosis or endo-
thelial impairment, aspirin and statin should be 
considered. Sublingual nitroglycerin as needed.
Smoking cessation and lifestyle changes.
Antianginal Rx
First line: CCB (eg, verapamil 40 mg BID 
uptitrated)
Second line: Add long-acting nitrate  
(eg, isosorbide monotitrate 10 mg BID)
Third line: Change nitrate to nicorandil* 
(eg, nicorandil 5 mg BID)
Mixed MVA/VSA CMD and epicardial 
vasospasmEpicardial spasm plus any abnormality of:
 Microvascular resistance
 Coronary vasorelaxation
 Microvasodilator capacityBaseline therapy: Consider aspirin, statin  
and ACEi therapy in all patients. Sublingual  
nitroglycerin as needed.
Obstructive CAD >50% lesion by diameter stenosis in epicardial artery >2.5 
mm or a FFR ≤0.80Baseline therapy: If atherosclerosis or  
endothelial impairment, patients should be  
considered for aspirin, statin, and ACEi.
Consideration of revascularization, antianginal 
therapy as per guidelines
Noncardiac None Exclusion of diffuse or obstructive epicardial coronary 
disease (FFR >0.8) without any of the after abnormalities 
of coronary function: CFR <2.0, IMR ≥25 or functional 
angina/spasm during acetylcholine.Cessation of antianginal therapy. Stop  
antiplatelet and statins unless other indication.
Consider noncardiac investigation or referral 
where appropriate (eg, psychology, gastroen-
terology)
*Currently unavailable in the United States.
ACEi indicates angiotensin converting enzyme inhibitor; CAD, coronary artery disease; CCB, calcium channel blocker; CFR, coronary flow reserve; CMD, coronary 
microvascular disease; DHP, dihydropyridine; ECG, electrocardiogram; FFR, fractional flow reserve; IMR, index of microvascular resistance; MVA, microvascular angina; 
and VSA, vasospastic angina.
Modified with permission from Ford T J, et al.1 Copyright 2018 American College of Cardiology Foundation.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on November 12, 2025

CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINESCirculation. 2023;148:e9–e119. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000001168 August 29, 2023
Virani et al 2023 AHA/ACC/ACCP/ASPC/NLA/PCNA Chronic Coronary Disease Guideline e69with valvular heart disease and concomitant CCD should 
be managed according to current recommendations for 
secondary prevention as outlined in this guideline. Pa-
tients with severe aortic stenosis and concomitant CCD 
who undergo PCI and transcatheter aortic valve implanta-
tion should be treated with DAPT according to the 2021 
ACC/AHA/SCAI revascularization guidelines.4
6.3. Young Adults
Recommendation for Young Adults
Referenced studies that support the recommendation are  
summarized in the Online Data Supplement. 
COR LOE Recommendation 
2a C-LD 1. In young adults with CCD, after optimization of 
traditional cardiovascular risk factors, a compre-
hensive evaluation and treatment of nontraditional 
cardiovascular risk factors can be beneficial in 
reducing the risk of cardiovascular events.1–3
Synopsis
Young adults with CAD represent a unique subset of pa-
tients who remain at risk for prolonged cardiovascular 
morbidity, recurrent MACE, and loss of QAL Ys.1,4 Most 
have ≥1 traditional cardiovascular risk factors (Table 
18).5,6 Suboptimal control of traditional risk factors has 
been associated with a higher incidence of recurrent 
MACE among young adults, thereby warranting optimi-
zation similar to older adults, including similar secondary 
prevention strategies.1,4,7 ,8 Given a substantial prevalence 
of FH,3 screening for FH can be beneficial (with genotypic 
screening performing less well than phenotypic screen-
ing in non-White population). Safety and efficacy of statin 
therapy in reduction of cardiovascular events was shown 
in a 20-year follow-up analysis of young patients with 
FH.9 Among those diagnosed with FH or with increased 
lipoprotein(a) levels, appropriate lipid screening of family 
members can be considered. Evaluation and treatment of nontraditional risk factors should be considered to de-
crease risk of future cardiovascular events. Furthermore, 
implementing strategies such as optimizing health care 
access, educating patients, motivational interviewing, 
using health information technology tools, and reduc-
ing barriers in obtaining medications may be beneficial 
in optimizing medication adherence10,11 (see Section 
4.1.2, “Patient Education” and Section 4.1.4, “Social De-
terminants of Health”). Evaluation and management of 
nonatherosclerotic causes such as coronary anomalies,  
Kawasaki disease, or myocardial bridging may be benefi-
cial (Table 19).12–14 Longitudinal follow-up of these pa-
tients with CVD specialists should be encouraged (see 
Section 7 .1, “Follow-Up Plan and Testing”).
Recommendation-Specific Supportive Text
 1. AFIJI (Appraisal of Risk Factors in Young Ischemic 
Patients Justifying Aggressive Intervention) was 
a prospective multicenter cohort study evaluating 
young patients diagnosed with CAD at age ≤45 
years.1 During their long-term follow-up, the inves-
tigators observed diabetes and current smoking to 
be associated with higher risk of recurrent MACE. 
Additionally, chronic inflammatory disease state (eg, 
HIV, viral hepatitis, systemic autoimmune disease) 
was associated with overall poor outcomes. More 
recently, similar observations were made by inves-
tigators from the YOUNG-MI (The Conundrum of 
Sex Differences in Outcomes of Young Patients 
with Acute MI)15 and VITAL2 registries that have 
highlighted the importance of traditional cardio-
metabolic risk factors along with nontraditional 
risk enhancers among young adults with CAD. 
Although the attributable risk of traditional risk fac-
tors such as tobacco use, vaping, hypertension, and 
diabetes may supersede that of nontraditional risk 
factors among young adults with CCD, the role of 
Table 18. Traditional and Nontraditional Risk Factors Associated With CCD in Young Adults
Traditional Risk Factors Nontraditional Risk Factors 
Hypertension (Section 4.2.7 , “Blood Pressure Management”) HIV and ART (Section 6.8, “HIV/Autoimmune Disorders”)
Obesity and metabolic syndrome (Section 4.2.9, “Weight Management”) Recreational substance use (cocaine and marijuana) (Section 4.2.4, “Alcohol and 
Substance Use”)
Diabetes (Section 4.2.8, “Sodium Glucose Cotransporter 2 Inhibitors 
and Glucagon Peptide-1 Receptor Agonists”)Systemic inflammatory disorders (IBD, SLE, RA, gout, PsA, AS) and vasculitides
Unhealthy diet and physical inactivity (Section 4.2.1, “Nutrition, including 
Supplements, ” and Section 4.2.11, physical activity)Pregnancy-related complications (IUGR, HDP, gestational diabetes) (Section 6.5, 
“Women, Including Pregnancy and Hormone Therapy”)
Hyperlipidemia (LDL-C, Lp(a)) (Section 4.2.6, “Lipid Management”) Familial hypercholesterolemia
Tobacco use (Section 4.2.3, “Tobacco Products”) Miscellaneous (psychological well-being, sleep quality, social determinants of health 
(Section 4.1.4, “Social Determinants of Health, ” and Section 4.2.2, “Mental Health”)
Family history of premature CAD History of chest radiation
ART indicates antiretroviral therapy; AS, ankylosing spondylitis; CCD, chronic coronary disease; Ch9p21, chromosome 9p21 locus; HDP, hypertensive disorders of 
pregnancy; HIV, human immunodeficiency virus; IBD, inflammatory bowel disease; IUGR, intrauterine growth retardation; LDL-C, low-density lipoprotein cholesterol; 
Lp(a), lipoprotein (a); PsA, psoriatic arthritis; RA, rheumatoid arthritis; and SLE, systemic lupus erythematosus.
Adapted from Mahtta D, et al.18 by permission from Springer Nature, Copyright 2020.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on November 12, 2025

CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINESAugust 29, 2023 Circulation. 2023;148:e9–e119. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000001168
Virani et al 2023 AHA/ACC/ACCP/ASPC/NLA/PCNA Chronic Coronary Disease Guideline e70these unique risk factors such as chronic inflam-
mation, genetics (Ch9p21 locus, lipoprotein(a)), 
and recreational drug use remains at the center of 
clinical optimization. Assessing for and aggressive 
treatment of nontraditional cardiovascular risk fac-
tors (Table 18) such as inflammatory conditions or 
recreational drug use are important to reduce car-
diovascular risk among young adults with CCD.1-
3,16,17 Evaluation for nonatherosclerotic causes of 
CCD among young adults (coronary anomalies, 
vasospasm, or spontaneous dissection) should 
also be prioritized (see Section 6.1, “Existing Heart 
Diseases and Conditions” and Section 6.5, “Women, 
Including Pregnancy and Hormone Therapy”).
6.4. Cancer
Recommendation for Cancer
Referenced studies that support the recommendation are  
summarized in the Online Data Supplement. 
COR LOE Recommendation 
1 C-LD 1. In patients with CCD and cancer, a multidisciplinary 
team including cardiology and oncology expertise 
is recommended to improve long-term CVD out-
comes.1,2
Synopsis
Cancer and CCD share mechanistic pathophysiology3–5 
and are the 2 leading causes of death worldwide,6 sharing  
multiple risk factors such as sedentary lifestyle, obesity, 
smoking, diabetes, and age.4,7 Cancer and CVD increas-
ingly coexist, yet patients with CCD and cancer are of-
ten undertreated4 and are high risk for cardiovascular 
adverse events. Commonly used chemotherapy and ra-
diation therapy may have cardiac toxicity,8,9 and some 
classes of cytotoxic chemotherapy increase CVD risk 
factors.10 In 2022, AHA published a scientific statement 
on cardio-oncology drug interactions, noting communi-
cation between oncology and cardiology specialists is 
warranted.11 If CCD medications are stopped because of cancer treatment, they should be resumed as soon as 
possible. In 2019, the AHA provided a scientific state-
ment in favor of the development of cardio-oncology 
rehabilitation for patients at high risk of developing car-
diovascular dysfunction.2
Recommendation-Specific Supportive Text
 1. A multidisciplinary cardio-oncology team should 
evaluate the patient before cancer treatment 
and monitor the patient throughout the course of 
treatment.10 Longitudinal registries suggest that 
cardiovascular outcomes have improved with the 
introduction of multidisciplinary care teams in can-
cer treatment. In settings where multidisciplinary 
teams are unavailable, clinicians should consider 
referral to relevant subspecialties as appropriate.1,12 
Cardio-oncology is a growing subspecialty that 
promotes the need for effective cancer treatment 
while minimizing negative cardiovascular adverse 
events.13 The cardio-oncology team is involved in 
all aspects of the care of cancer patients, from 
informing pretreatment risk and regimen selection, 
addressing the complex cardiovascular adverse 
effects of cancer therapy, and mitigating the 
heightened long-term risks of CVD in survivorship. 
This team manages common conditions between 
subspecialties, such as antiplatelet therapy for 
venous thromboembolism prophylaxis. Patients 
with CCD and locally advanced or metastatic can-
cer can be at increased risk for arterial thrombosis 
and cardiovascular adverse events. If the patient 
is not already on an antithrombotic regimen, clini-
cians may offer thromboprophylaxis with apixaban, 
rivaroxaban, or low-molecular-weight heparin to 
selected high-risk outpatients with cancer.14 Refer 
to Section 4.1.1 (“Team-Based Approach”), Section 
4.1.2 (“Patient Education”), and Section 4.1.4 
(“Social Determinants of Health”) for management 
of the patient with CCD and comorbidities.Table 19. Nonatherosclerotic Causes of CCD in Young Adults: Evaluation and Management
Cause Presentation Management 
Kawasaki disease Late sequelae: coronary artery  
aneurysm, stenosis, thrombosis, or fistulaLifelong follow-up with quantitative assessment of luminal dimensions.
Low-dose aspirin therapy for small- or medium-sized coronary artery aneurysms.
Low-dose aspirin plus anticoagulant therapy for large coronary artery aneurysms.
Coronary artery anomalies Anomalous left coronary artery from the 
pulmonary artery
Anomalous origin of the coronary artery 
from the opposite sinus of Valsalva with an 
interarterial courseSurgical repair – translocation of left coronary artery to aortic root for anomalous left 
coronary artery from the pulmonary artery.
Surgical correction among young adults with interarterial course of coronary artery 
originating from opposite sinus of Valsalva and symptoms during exercise  
suggestive of myocardial ischemia.
Myocardial bridging Exercise-induced ischemia
Coronary artery vasospasm
Sudden cardiac deathBeta-adrenergic blocking agents in symptomatic patients.
Restriction to low-intensity sports.
Surgical correction if symptoms refractory to medical therapy.
CCD indicates chronic coronary disease.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on November 12, 2025

CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINESCirculation. 2023;148:e9–e119. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000001168 August 29, 2023
Virani et al 2023 AHA/ACC/ACCP/ASPC/NLA/PCNA Chronic Coronary Disease Guideline e716.5. Women, Including Pregnancy and 
Postmenopausal Hormone Therapy
Recommendations for Women, Including Pregnancy and  
Postmenopausal Hormone Therapy
Referenced studies that support the recommendations are  
summarized in the Online Data Supplement. 
COR LOE Recommendations 
Pregnancy
1 C-LD 1. Women with CCD who are contemplating preg-
nancy or who are pregnant should be risk-stratified 
and counseled regarding risks of adverse maternal, 
obstetric, and fetal outcomes.1–4
1 C-LD 2. Women with CCD who are contemplating preg-
nancy or who are pregnant should receive care 
from a multidisciplinary cardio-obstetric care 
team beginning before conception and continuing 
throughout pregnancy, delivery, and postpartum to 
improve maternal and fetal outcomes.1,2,5
2b C-LD 3. In women with CCD, continuation of statin use dur-
ing pregnancy may be considered.6
3: Harm C-LD 4. Women with CCD who are contemplating pregnancy 
or who are pregnant should not use ACE inhibitors, 
ARBs, direct renin inhibitors, angiotensin receptor-
neprilysin inhibitors, or aldosterone antagonists dur-
ing pregnancy to prevent harm to the fetus.2,7 ,8
Postmenopausal Hormone Therapy
3: Harm A 5. Women with CCD should not receive systemic 
postmenopausal hormone therapy because of a 
lack of benefit on MACE and mortality, and an 
increased risk of venous thromboembolism.9–11
Synopsis
CCD remains uncommon among pregnant women 
ranging from <2% to 3.6% in published registries.12–14 
Physiologic changes in pregnancy that could influence 
myocardial workload and myocardial perfusion and thus 
precipitate acute cardiovascular events that include 
increases in circulating blood volume, stroke volume, 
heart rate, and cardiac output, decreases in systemic 
vascular resistance, diastolic BP and L V end-diastolic 
pressure, physiologic anemia, and a hypercoagulable 
state.2,15 Women with CCD who become pregnant are 
at high risk of adverse maternal and fetal outcomes1,3 
and are best managed by a multidisciplinary cardio-
obstetrics team.16 Pharmacologic therapy should bal-
ance maternal benefit and fetal risk.7 Postmenopausal 
hormone therapy has been assessed among women 
with CCD in trials with angiographic endpoints17–20 and 
in trials designed to evaluate angina or morbidity and 
mortality rates.9,10,21–23 Trials tested either estrogen-only 
regimens (in women without a uterus) or combined es-
trogen and progestin regimens (in women with a uter-
us). None of these trials showed benefits on recurrent 
cardiovascular events. Venous thromboembolism was 
significantly increased in these trials. No RCTs exist that 
have tested transdermal hormone regimens to assess 
their effect on MACE and mortality.Recommendation-Specific Supportive Text
 1. A systematic review of 37 studies including 124 
pregnancies in 116 women with CCD1 reported 
cardiovascular complications in 32% of pregnan-
cies, including ischemic cardiovascular events in 
9%, and obstetric and fetal/neonatal complica-
tions in 58% and 42%, respectively. Only 21% 
of pregnancies were uncomplicated. In a study of 
79 women with CCD (92 pregnancies of at least 
24 weeks’ gestation), 66% had adverse cardiac 
events and 14% developed preeclampsia; 25% 
of infants were delivered preterm, and 25% were 
born small for gestational age.13 In the CARPREG II  
(Pregnancy Outcomes in Women with Heart Disease) 
prospective registry, a history of CCD was indepen-
dently associated with adverse cardiac events (odds 
ratio, 3.0 [95% CI, 1.1-7 .6]).3 Women with CCD, 
including women with previous SCAD (Section 
6.1.1), who are contemplating pregnancy should 
undergo thorough evaluation and risk stratification 
using a validated instrument such as the CARPREG 
Table 20. CARPREG II Risk Prediction Model
CARPREG II Predictors Points 
Previous cardiac event or arrhythmia 3
Baseline NYHA functional class III to IV or cyanosis 3
Mechanical valve 3
Ventricular dysfunction 2
High-risk left-sided valve disease and LVOT obstruction 2
Pulmonary hypertension 2
CAD 2
High-risk aortopathy 2
No previous cardiac intervention 1
Late pregnancy assessment 1
CARPREG II Score Predicted Risk, % 
0 to 1 5
2 10
3 15
4 22
>4 41
The CARPREG (Cardiac Disease in Pregnancy Study) II risk score is based 
on 10 predictors, shown in the table. Each predictor is assigned a weighted 
point score. The sum of points represents the risk score. Risk scores are cate-
gorized into 5 groups. The predicted and observed frequency of primary cardiac 
events* in the derivation and validation groups is available at the CARPREG II 
Study https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jacc.2018.02.076.
*Primary cardiac events were defined as any of these: maternal cardiac death; 
cardiac arrest; sustained arrhythmia requiring treatment; left-sided HF defined as 
pulmonary edema; right-sided HF; stroke or TIA; cardiac thromboembolism; MI; 
and vascular dissection.
CAD indicates coronary artery disease; HF, heart failure; L VOT, left ventricular 
outflow tract; MI, myocardial infarction; NYHA, New York Heart Association; and 
TIA, transient ischemic attack.
Modified with permission from Silversides CK, et al.3 Copyright 2018 Ameri-
can College of Cardiology Foundation.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on November 12, 2025

CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINESAugust 29, 2023 Circulation. 2023;148:e9–e119. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000001168
Virani et al 2023 AHA/ACC/ACCP/ASPC/NLA/PCNA Chronic Coronary Disease Guideline e72II (Table 20) and be counseled regarding potential 
risks to mother and fetus.2,15 Pharmacokinetics of 
medications may be altered in pregnancy because of 
changes in absorption, volume of distribution, serum 
protein binding, extraction ratio, hepatic and renal 
clearance, uteroplacental flow, and fetal metabo-
lism.7 Medication regimens should be optimized 
during family planning to ensure safety throughout 
pregnancy and lactation.2,7 Recommendations for 
selected cardiovascular medications during preg-
nancy and lactation are summarized in Table 21.
 2. A multidisciplinary cardio-obstetrics team (Figure 
10) should evaluate the patient before conception 
and monitor the patient throughout her pregnancy, 
carefully plan for labor and delivery, and provide 
close follow-up during the postpartum period to 
address medication management during lactation, 
monitor for cardiovascular complications, manage 
cardiovascular risk factors, and advise on contra-
ception.5,16 Longitudinal registries suggest that 
pregnancy outcomes have improved with the intro-
duction of multidisciplinary care teams.1 In health 
care settings where multidisciplinary teams are 
unavailable, clinicians should consider referral to 
relevant subspecialties as appropriate.
 3. Statins have been contraindicated in pregnancy since 
their approval in 1987 . FDA guidance published in 
July 2021 requested removal of this contraindication 
from all statin labels.6 A 2015 US propensity-based Table 21. Safety of Cardiovascular Medications During 
Pregnancy and Lactation
Medication Safety in Pregnancy Safety in Lactation 
Arrhythmias
 Adenosine S LD
 Metoprolol/propranolol S LD
 Digoxin S S
 Lidocaine S S
 Verapamil LD LD
 Diltiazem LD U
 Procainamide LD LD
 Sotalol LD U
 Flecainide LD LD
 Propafenone LD LD
 Amiodarone* C C
Heart Failure
 Metoprolol S LD
 Carvedilol S U
 Furosemide S LD
 Bumetanide S U
 Dopamine S U
 Dobutamine S U
 Norepinephrine S U
 Hydralazine LD S
 Nitroglycerine LD U
 Isosorbide dinitrate LD U
 Torsemide LD U
 Metolazone LD U
Anticoagulants
 Warfarin LD S
 Unfractionated heparin S S
 Enoxaparin S S
 Fondaparinux LD U
 Argatroban LD U
 Bivalirudin LD U
Antiplatelets
 Aspirin (low dose) LD LD
 Clopidogrel LD LD
 Prasugrel LD U
 Ticagrelor LD U
Thrombolytics
 Alteplase LD U 
 Streptokinase LD U
Hypertension
 Labetalol S LD
 Nifedipine S S
 Alpha-methyldopa (oral) S S
 Hydralazine LD S
(Continued )Medication Safety in Pregnancy Safety in Lactation 
 Nitroglycerin LD U
 Nitroprusside LD LD
 Isosorbide dinitrate LD U
 Amlodipine LD LD
 Furosemide S LD
 Hydrochlorothiazide LD S
 Clonidine LD U
Cautionary Use and Contraindicated in Pregnancy
 Atenolol C LD
 ACE inhibitor class† C LD
 ARB class C U
 Aldosterone antagonists C C
 Statin class LD C
 DOAC C C
 ERAs (eg, bosentan) C C
Color key: C, contraindicated; LD, limited data, use with caution; S, considered 
safe; and U, conflicting data, unknown.
*May be used if other therapies fail.
†Captopril, benazepril, and enalapril are considered safe during lactation.
ACE indicates angiotensin-converting enzyme; ARB, angiotensin receptor block-
er; DOAC, direct oral anticoagulants; and ERA, endothelin-receptor antagonists.
Adapted with permission from Halpern DG, et al.7 Copyright 2019 American 
College of Cardiology Foundation.Table 21. Continued
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on November 12, 2025

CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINESCirculation. 2023;148:e9–e119. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000001168 August 29, 2023
Virani et al 2023 AHA/ACC/ACCP/ASPC/NLA/PCNA Chronic Coronary Disease Guideline e73analysis among 886 996 completed pregnancies 
linked to liveborn infants showed a 1.79-fold increase 
in risk of fetal malformations among the 1152 preg-
nancies with first-trimester exposure to statins, 
but this increase in risk was accounted for by con-
founders such as preexisting diabetes, lowering the 
relative risk to 1.07 (95% CI, 0.85-1.37) in adjusted 
analyses.24 A 2014 meta-analysis similarly found no 
increase in birth defects after statin exposure during pregnancy but found an increased risk of miscarriage 
that the authors attributed to underlying maternal 
comorbidities.25 A 2017 analysis of the UK General 
Practice Research Database showed a 1.64-fold 
increased risk of fetal loss in statin-exposed preg-
nancies but could not fully account for differences 
in baseline characteristics in exposed and unex-
posed pregnancies.26 The FDA concluded that data 
are insufficient at this time to determine whether Figure 10. Team-Based Cardio-Obstetrics Model of Care.
The cardio-obstetrics model of care involves multiple specialists working together and with the patient to address issues from preconception, 
through pregnancy and delivery, and the postpartum period. APO indicates adverse pregnancy outcomes; CARPREG II, Cardiac Disease 
in Pregnancy study; CVD, cardiovascular disease; mWHO, modified World Health Organization; ZAHARA, Zwangerschap bij Aangeboren 
HARtAfwijking (Pregnancy in Women With Congenital Heart Disease) study. Modified with permission from Davis MB, et al.16 Copyright 2021 
American College of Cardiology Foundation.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on November 12, 2025

CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINESAugust 29, 2023 Circulation. 2023;148:e9–e119. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000001168
Virani et al 2023 AHA/ACC/ACCP/ASPC/NLA/PCNA Chronic Coronary Disease Guideline e74there is statin-associated increased risk of miscar-
riage. Statins remain contraindicated during lactation 
(Table 21). Lipoprotein apheresis can be considered 
for women with heterozygous or homozygous familial 
hypercholesterolemia and CCD.27
 4. ACE inhibitors, ARBs, direct renin inhibitors, and 
angiotensin receptor-neprilysin inhibitors can 
cause renal dysgenesis, oligohydramnios because 
of fetal oliguria, neonatal anuric renal failure, intra-
uterine growth retardation, pulmonary hypoplasia, 
and fetal death, especially when used in the sec-
ond and third trimester of pregnancy.8 Benazepril, 
captopril, and enalapril are safe during lactation.7 
Aldosterone antagonists are contraindicated in 
pregnancy because of their antiandrogen effects 
and potential teratogenesis. Aldosterone antago-
nists are also contraindicated during lactation.7
 5. Data from secondary prevention trials of hormone 
therapy11 concluded that there was no effect on 
cardiovascular death, nonfatal MI, stroke, angina, or 
coronary revascularization. A statistically significant 
increased risk of venous thromboembolism was 
observed (relative risk, 2.02 [95% CI, 1.13-3.62]). 
In the angiographic trials,17–20 no benefit of hormone 
therapy was seen on progression of disease in native 
CAD with estrogen only or with estrogen-progestin 
therapy. The EAGAR (Effects of Aspirin in Gestation 
and Reproduction) study20 showed enhanced pro-
gression in native coronary arteries yet slowing of 
disease progression in saphenous vein grafts; the 
reason for this differential response is unknown. 
Increased risk of thromboembolism also was docu-
mented in a trial of hormone therapy among women 
with previous venous thromboembolism.28 Less is 
known about the risk of oral contraceptives among 
women with CCD. A recent review on estrogen and 
thrombosis29 concluded that combined hormonal 
contraceptives and injectable depot medroxypro-
gesterone acetate should be avoided among women 
with CCD or previous stroke as both forms of contra-
ceptive therapy increase thrombosis risk.30,31
   Increased cardiovascular risk has been docu-
mented among transwomen with increased rates 
of venous thromboembolism, acute MI, and stroke 
compared with ciswomen but not always when 
compared with cismen.29,32 This increase in cardio-
vascular risk is at least in part related to hormone 
therapy. Whether prevalent CCD further increases 
risk in hormone-treated transgender women is 
unknown with future research needed.
6.6. Older Adults
Synopsis
Older patients, defined as ≥ 75 years of age in accor-
dance with a recent statement published by the AHA, 
ACC, and American Geriatrics Society,1 have a high prevalence of CCD and, when present, is more likely 
to be associated with high-risk anatomical features.2 
Although several retrospective studies, observational 
studies, and subgroup analyses have suggested that 
medical therapy3–6 and revascularization,7–17 when 
needed, may be effective in older patients, they are less 
likely to be treated.18 A paucity of RCTs with a focus 
on older patients leaves clinicians with inadequate data 
to guide their decision-making. The available data are 
limited by a variable definition of the term older; in fact, 
some studies have included individuals as young as 
60 years of age. Furthermore, many studies comprise 
patients with both acute and CCD, making it difficult 
to determine in which clinical scenario a treatment is 
efficacious. The treatment of CCD in older patients is 
further complicated by the presence of multiple comor-
bidities and polypharmacy, both of which can heighten 
the risk of treatment-related complications. Based on 
a patient’s comorbidities and extent of polypharmacy, 
scenarios may exist where alternate treatment or pro-
cedural approaches (beta blockers,19 antithrombotic 
and antiplatelet agents,9,20–23 coronary angiography,24 
CABG,25–29 CR30,31) may be preferable. For example, a 
meta-analysis of 6 RCTs comparing short-term versus 
long-term DAPT in elderly patients.21 The use of short-
term DAPT was not associated with an increase in car-
diovascular events but was associated with a significant 
reduction in major bleeding. Additionally, traditional risk 
scoring systems in patients with CCD may need to be 
modified to most accurately assess an older patient’s 
risk.32,33 Older patients also have an increased preva-
lence of frailty,34–37 malnourishment,38–41 and cognitive 
decline, all of which may be associated with poor out-
comes and treatment response. Equally important, older 
patients are more likely to prioritize the ability to remain 
independent, with a focus on maintaining their mobility 
and functional status rather than reducing their mor-
tality rate.3 When considering treatment options, team-
based care (Section 4.1.1) and shared decision-making 
Table 22. The Geriatric 5 Ms
MIND Mentation, dementia, delirium, depression
MOBILITY Impaired gait and balance, fall injury prevention
MEDICATIONS Polypharmacy, deprescribing, optimal prescribing
Adverse medication effects and medication burden
MUL TICOMPLEXITY Multimorbidity
Complex biopsychosocial situations
MATTERS MOST Each individual’s own meaningful health outcome 
goals and care preferences
Adapted with permission from Molnar F, et al.42 Copyright 2017 Canadian Ge-
riatrics Society and from Molnar F, et al. Copyright 2019 The College of Family 
Physicians of Canada. The GERIATRIC 5Ms, Copyright © 2017 Frank Molnar, 
Allen Huang, Mary Tinetti. 2017 . The Geriatric 5Ms may be used for education-
al purposes with full attribution and no alterations. This work is bound by the 
Creative Commons license CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 (https://creativecommons.org/
licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on November 12, 2025

CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINESCirculation. 2023;148:e9–e119. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000001168 August 29, 2023
Virani et al 2023 AHA/ACC/ACCP/ASPC/NLA/PCNA Chronic Coronary Disease Guideline e75(Section 4.1.3) are particularly important when caring 
for older patients. A framework that considers the 5 Ms 
of geriatric care42 (Table 22) may be a useful approach 
to guide these discussions.
6.7 . Chronic Kidney Disease
Recommendation for CKD
Referenced studies that support the recommendation are  
summarized in the Online Data Supplement. 
COR LOE Recommendation 
1 C-LD 1. In patients with CCD and CKD, measures should 
be taken to minimize the risk of treatment-related 
acute kidney injury.*1–3
*Modified from the 2021 ACC/AHA/SCAI Guideline for Coronary Artery Re-
vascularization.4
Synopsis
CKD increases the risk of CAD progression and is as-
sociated with poor outcomes after interventions.5–8 The 
mortality rate for patients on hemodialysis is ∼20% per 
year, with approximately 50% attributable to a cardio-
vascular cause.9–12 Postmortem studies have revealed 
that patients with CKD not only have a higher burden of 
atherosclerosis but, also, the plaque features are more 
advanced, with evidence of increased inflammation.13–15 
Despite the higher prevalence of disease, noninvasive di-
agnostic testing is often less accurate.20–24
Guidance related to the use of pharmacological and 
interventional therapy is limited by underrepresentation 
of patients with CKD in clinical trials16 and attributable to 
inconsistent definitions of CKD. It is unclear whether med-
ical therapy is as efficacious in patients with CKD because 
of differences in the risk and benefit balance in the setting 
of underlying kidney disease.17 ,18–21 In the absence of data 
from dedicated RCTs, patients with CKD should receive 
similar medical therapy as patients without CKD.22
Given the complex interactions, a team-based 
approach (Section 4.1.1) that includes individuals from 
the cardiac and renal teams, to include shared decision-
making (Section 4.1.3), would be beneficial, especially 
when considering decisions such as revascularization for 
which decreased short-term risk must be balanced with 
long-term benefit.23,24 For additional reference, please 
see patient education and SDOH (Sections 4.1.2 and 
4.1.4) within this guideline.
Recommendation-Specific Supportive Text
 1. In the ISCHEMIA-CKD (International Study of 
Comparative Health Effectiveness with Medical and 
Invasive Approaches) trial, patients with a moderate 
to severe burden of ischemia and estimated glomer-
ular filtration rate [eGFR] of <30 mL/min/1.73 m2  
of body-surface area or the receipt of dialysis did 
not have improved outcomes with the addition of revascularization to GDMT, suggesting that revascu-
larization can be reserved for patients who remain 
symptomatic despite medical therapy,25 clarifying 
conflicting data from previous studies.8,26 When PCI 
is clinically needed, the risk of contrast-induced acute 
kidney injury (AKI) should not be a reason to with-
hold it in most patients with CKD.4 When possible, 
attempts to minimize the risk of contrast nephropa-
thy should be made through the avoidance of neph-
rotoxic agents, use of adequate hydration before the 
administration of iodinated contrast-agent,27–29 and 
minimization of the volume of contrast media.30,31 
Additionally, high-dose statins may reduce the occur-
rence of contrast-induced AKI.32 The use of radial 
access may minimize the role of atheroembolism on 
the development of AKI33–35; however, conflicting 
data exist.36,37 Delay of CABG in stable patients after 
angiography beyond 24 hours, when clinically fea-
sible, can also help reduce the risk of AKI.38 There is 
no benefit of bicarbonate or N-acetyl-L-cysteine over 
normal saline for prevention of AKI.39
6.8. HIV and Autoimmune Disorders
Recommendations for HIV and Autoimmune Disorders
Referenced studies that support the recommendations are  
summarized in the Online Data Supplement. 
COR LOE Recommendations 
HIV
1 B-R 1. In adults with CCD and HIV, antiretroviral therapy 
is beneficial to decrease the risk of cardiovascular 
events.1,2
2a B-R 2. In adults with CCD and HIV, it is reasonable to 
choose antiretroviral therapy regimens associated 
with more favorable lipid and cardiovascular risk pro-
files with consideration of drug-drug interactions.3–5
3: Harm C-LD 3. In adults with CCD and HIV, lovastatin or  
simvastatin should not be administered with  
protease inhibitors as this may cause harm.6,7
Autoimmune Disorders in CCD
2a C-LD 4. In adults with CCD and rheumatoid arthritis, initia-
tion and maintenance of disease-modifying anti-
rheumatoid drugs is beneficial to decrease the risk 
of cardiovascular events.8–11
2b C-LD 5. In adults with CCD and autoimmune diseases, 
treatment with biologics and other immune modu-
lating therapies that reduce disease activity may be 
considered to decrease the risk of cardiovascular 
events.10,11
3: Harm C-LD 6. In patients with CCD and rheumatoid arthritis, high-
dose glucocorticoids should not be used long term 
if alternative therapies are available because of 
increased cardiovascular risk.11,12
Synopsis
HIV and other chronic inflammatory conditions are as-
sociated with accelerated atherosclerosis and premature 
CVD. The 2018 ACC/AHA blood cholesterol guideline 
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on November 12, 2025

CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINESAugust 29, 2023 Circulation. 2023;148:e9–e119. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000001168
Virani et al 2023 AHA/ACC/ACCP/ASPC/NLA/PCNA Chronic Coronary Disease Guideline e76recommends that chronic inflammatory conditions be 
considered risk-enhancing factors that should guide clini-
cian-patient risk discussion for cholesterol management.13  
Patients with HIV have a higher risk of CAD and MI 
compared with age- and sex-matched controls.14 The in-
creased risk may be attributable to HIV itself, the antiret-
roviral therapy,15 and to a higher prevalence of traditional, 
modifiable risk factors.6 Newer generation antiretroviral 
therapy regimens have more favorable lipid effects and 
are associated with improvements in subclinical markers 
of atherosclerosis. Similarly, although new treatments for 
autoimmune diseases, including rheumatoid arthritis, pso-
riatic arthritis, systemic lupus erythematous, and inflam-
matory bowel diseases, can negatively affect lipid profiles, 
adequate control of disease activity with steroid-sparing 
agents should be prioritized and may help lower cardio-
vascular risk.10 Because of the rapidly changing and com-
plex pharmacological landscape in treating HIV and other 
chronic inflammatory conditions, patients should receive 
care from a multidisciplinary care team that includes in-
fectious disease, rheumatology expertise, or both.
Recommendation-Specific Supportive Text
 1. The SMART (Strategies for Management of 
Antiretroviral Therapy) trial showed that, compared 
with continuous use of antiretroviral therapy, epi-
sodic use of antiretroviral therapy increased risk of 
opportunistic disease and death from any cause, 
including CVD.1 The MI event rate was 1.3 per 
100 person-years in the interruption arm versus 
0.8 per 100 person-years in the continuous use of antiretroviral therapy arm. Higher CD4 cell count 
and lower HIV RNA levels are associated with a 
lower risk of ASCVD.6,16,17
 2. Excess cardiovascular risk in patients with HIV may 
be partly attributable to side effects from antiretrovi-
ral therapy, including adverse effects on lipid levels. In 
adults with CCD and HIV, it is reasonable to choose 
newer generation antiretroviral treatment regimens 
associated with more favorable lipid and cardiovas-
cular risk profiles.3–5 These include protease inhibitor 
regimens with lower doses of ritonavir for boosting 
and using atazanavir-ritonavir–containing regimens 
(see Table 23 for commonly used antiretroviral ther-
apy drugs and the effect on lipid levels). In 1 ran-
domized study, switching from a ritonavir-boosted 
protease inhibitor to a dolutegravir-based regimen 
was noninferior in maintaining a viral suppression 
with improvement in lipid levels (7 .7% LDL-C reduc-
tion).3 Contemporary US guidelines recommend that 
individuals with HIV and CVD should switch from an 
abacavir-containing regimen because of its possible 
association with increased cardiovascular events.4,18 
Drug interactions are common among patients with 
HIV on antiretroviral therapy, which should be con-
sidered when starting or intensifying statin therapy 
for management of CCD.6,7 ,19,20 Although pravas-
tatin and pitavastatin are least likely to interact with 
antiretroviral therapy, rosuvastatin and atorvastatin 
may be preferred for more intense LDL-C reduc-
tion in patients with HIV and CCD.20,21 Management 
of hypertriglyceridemia in patients with CCD and 
HIV should follow standard treatment pathways.22 Table 23. Common Antiretroviral Therapy Drugs and Effects on Lipid Levels
Class Drug Effect on Blood Lipids 
Protease inhibitors Atazanavir Increases HDL-C and decreases LDL-C levels
Darunavir Increases HDL-C levels
Fosamprenavir Hypertriglyceridemia
Ritonavir* Increases HDL-C levels
Saquinavir Neutral
Tipranavir Dyslipidemia
NRTIs Abacavir Increases total cholesterol, LDL-C, and HDL-C levels
Lamivudine Increases total cholesterol, LDL-C, and HDL-C levels
Tenofovir fumarate disoproxil Lowers LDL levels
Zidovudine Hypertriglyceridemia
NNRTIs Efavirenz Increases total cholesterol, LDL-C, HDL-C, and triglyceride levels
Nevirapine Neutral or decreases lipid levels
Rilpivirine Neutral
Integrase inhibitors Dolutegravir Neutral
Raltegravir Increases HDL levels
*Although ritonavir is a protease inhibitor, this drug is generally used as a pharmacokinetic enhancer.
HDL indicates high-density lipoprotein; HDL-C, high-density lipoprotein cholesterol; LDL, low-density lipoprotein; LDL-C, low-density lipoprotein cholesterol; NNRTI, 
nonnucleoside reverse-transcriptase inhibitor; and NRTI, nucleoside reverse-transcriptase inhibitor.
Adapted from Hsue PY et al.6 by permission from Springer Nature, Copyright 2019.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on November 12, 2025

CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINESCirculation. 2023;148:e9–e119. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000001168 August 29, 2023
Virani et al 2023 AHA/ACC/ACCP/ASPC/NLA/PCNA Chronic Coronary Disease Guideline e77Triglyceride levels ≥ 500 mg/dL should be treated 
pharmacologically to reduce the risk of pancreati-
tis. Drug-drug interactions with protease inhibitors 
can also occur with antiplatelet drugs like ticagre-
lor because of its CYP3A metabolism,23 which may 
increase the risk of bleeding.
 3. Because lovastatin and simvastatin are metabo-
lized by intestinal and liver CYP3A4, the con-
comitant use of protease inhibitors can increase 
levels of these statins and may increase the risk of 
rhabdomyolysis.6,7 ,24
 4. Patients with rheumatoid arthritis and other auto-
immune disease have residual inflammatory risk, 
beyond that conferred by traditional CVD risk 
factors. For patients with rheumatoid arthritis, 
disease-modifying antirheumatoid drugs such as 
methotrexate are associated with lower risk of 
cardiovascular events in observational studies.10 A 
single-center observational study found that use of 
biologic disease–modifying antirheumatoid drugs 
in patients with rheumatoid arthritis stabilized and 
decreased plaque as measured by CCTA.25
 5. Janus kinase inhibitors, tumor necrosis factor inhibi-
tors, and other immunomodulators for the treatment 
of autoimmune diseases (eg, rheumatoid arthritis, 
psoriatic arthritis, ankylosing spondylitis, and ulcer-
ative colitis) may reduce cardiovascular events by 
reducing disease activity and inflammation.11,26,27 
These treatments should be used in combination 
with intensive management of traditional risk fac-
tors (see Section 4.2.6, “Lipid Management,” Section 
4.2.7 , “Blood Pressure Management,” and Section 
4.2.8, “Sodium Glucose Cotransporter 2 Inhibitors 
and Glucagon-Like Peptide-1 Receptor Agonists”).
 6. Observational studies suggest that long-term use of 
higher doses of glucocorticoids (≥ 5 mg of predni-
sone) in patients with rheumatoid arthritis are asso-
ciated with a higher risk of cardiovascular events.12 
This association has not been described with the 
use of steroid-sparing agents11 or shorter duration 
use of steroids (<81 days in 6 months or cumula-
tive doses of <751 mg in 6 months).12 Using short 
courses of glucocorticoids for autoimmune disease 
flares is unlikely to increase cardiovascular risk.
6.9. Cardiac Allograft Vasculopathy in Heart 
Transplant Recipients
Recommendations for Management of Cardiac Allograft Vasculopathy 
in Heart Transplant Recipients
Referenced studies that support the recommendations are  
summarized in the Online Data Supplement. 
COR LOE Recommendations 
1 C-LD 1. In patients with cardiac allograft vasculopathy, 
statins are recommended for secondary  
prevention to reduce MACE.12a C-LD 2. In patients with cardiac allograft vasculopathy,  
aspirin can be beneficial for secondary prevention 
to reduce MACE.2
2a C-LD 3. In patients with severe cardiac allograft  
vasculopathy, revascularization is reasonable in 
those with suitable anatomy to potentially mitigate 
the adverse long-term consequences of cardiac 
allograft vasculopathy.*3–6
*Modified from the 2021 ACC/AHA/SCAI Guideline for Coronary Artery Re-
vascularization.7
Synopsis
Post–heart transplant cardiac allograft vasculopathy is 
the leading cause of long-term mortality and retransplan-
tation among heart transplant recipients.8 The incidence 
of cardiac allograft vasculopathy increases over time af-
ter heart transplant, developing in ∼30% of patients at 
5 years and ∼50% of patients at 10 years.8 Coronary 
angiography is the accepted clinical standard for screen-
ing and diagnosis of cardiac allograft vasculopathy.3,9 In-
travascular ultrasound is a useful adjunct to angiography 
and can improve detection of angiographically occult 
cardiac allograft vasculopathy.10 Lifestyle modifications 
and optimal control of cardiovascular risk factors are 
important for the primary and secondary prevention of 
cardiac allograft vasculopathy.3,11 In patients after heart 
transplant with or without established cardiac allograft 
vasculopathy, statins, aspirin, and high-intensity interval 
training delay cardiac allograft vasculopathy progres-
sion.1,2,12 In patients with cardiac allograft vasculopathy, 
PCI can be beneficial in those with severe, proximal, dis-
crete lesions, and the use of second-generation DES is 
associated with decreased rates of in-stent restenosis.4-7 
CABG is rarely used in highly selected patients with 
suitable anatomy, and retransplantation is reserved for 
patients with severe cardiac allograft vasculopathy not 
amenable to revascularization.3 In heart transplant re-
cipients with established cardiac allograft vasculopathy, 
early substitution of mycophenolate mofetil, azathioprine, 
or calcineurin inhibitor with a proliferation signal inhibitor 
can slow cardiac allograft vasculopathy progression but 
is associated with an increased risk of grade ≥2R rejec-
tion.13–17 CR is addressed in Section 4.2.10.
Recommendation-Specific Supportive Text
 1. Multiple RCTs have shown decreased incidence of 
cardiac allograft vasculopathy with simvastatin or 
pravastatin initiated early after heart transplant.18,19 
However, in patients with cardiac allograft vascu-
lopathy, RCTs evaluating the safety and efficacy 
of statins for secondary prevention are lacking. In 
a retrospective observational study of 409 heart Recommendations for Management of Cardiac Allograft Vasculopathy 
in Heart Transplant Recipients (Continued )
COR LOE Recommendations 
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on November 12, 2025

CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINESAugust 29, 2023 Circulation. 2023;148:e9–e119. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000001168
Virani et al 2023 AHA/ACC/ACCP/ASPC/NLA/PCNA Chronic Coronary Disease Guideline e78transplant recipients with or without established 
cardiac allograft vasculopathy, early (<2 years) ver-
sus late (>2 years) initiation of statin was asso-
ciated with significantly lower rates of cardiac 
allograft vasculopathy progression as measured 
by change in plaque volume and plaque index by 
intravascular ultrasound, as well as decreased risk 
of cardiac allograft vasculopathy–related events 
(allograft failure associated with cardiac allograft 
vasculopathy, MI, or PCI) and the composite of 
all-cause death and cardiac allograft vasculopa-
thy–related events, over a median follow-up of 
8.2 years.1 The choice and dose of statin in heart 
transplant recipients is not well established and will 
often depend on the other medications (particularly 
immunosuppressants) that the patient is concomi-
tantly taking (Table 24).20 A recent retrospective 
analysis of 346 adult patients who underwent 
heart transplant between 2006 and 2018 found 
that moderate/high- versus low-intensity statin 
therapy was associated with a significant reduction 
in the primary composite of time to HF hospitaliza-
tion, MI, revascularization, and all-cause death.21
 2. Aspirin is frequently initiated early after heart trans-
plant for prevention of cardiac allograft vasculopa-
thy. Although the proposed benefits of aspirin use 
have not been validated in RCTs, evidence from 
small retrospective single-center studies support 
early initiation of aspirin after heart transplant.2,22–24 
In a retrospective observational study of 529 heart 
transplant recipients with or without established 
cardiac allograft vasculopathy, early (<1 year) ver-
sus late (>1 year) initiation of aspirin was asso-
ciated with significantly lower rates of cardiac 
allograft vasculopathy progression as measured by change in plaque volume and plaque index by 
intravascular ultrasound, as well as decreased risk 
of all-cause death and cardiac allograft vascu-
lopathy–related graft dysfunction, over a median 
follow-up of 6.7 years.2
 3. Data showing improved outcomes with revascu-
larization versus medical therapy alone for car-
diac allograft vasculopathy are lacking. However, 
because increasing severity of cardiac allograft 
vasculopathy is associated with worse outcomes, 
revascularization is reasonable in patients with suit-
able anatomy.3 PCI can be beneficial in patients with 
cardiac allograft vasculopathy who present with 
severe, proximal, discrete lesions.7 Observational 
studies showed PCI for cardiac allograft vasculop-
athy is not only feasible with high procedural suc-
cess rates but also associated with reliable mid- to 
long-term angiographic outcomes, especially with 
the use of second-generation DES.4–6 PCI with 
everolimus-eluting stents for cardiac allograft vas-
culopathy was associated with in-stent restenosis 
rates of 3% to 5% at 6 to 12 months and 10% 
at 3 years, which are comparable to the use of 
everolimus-eluting stents in non–heart transplant 
CAD.4-6,25,26 Coronary physiology assessment mea-
suring FFR and the index of microcirculatory resis-
tance early after heart transplant has prognostic 
significance.27 ,28 However, the use of FFR to guide 
revascularization in patients with cardiac allograft 
vasculopathy (as opposed to those with non–heart 
transplant CAD) remains unknown. The use of 
CABG for severe cardiac allograft vasculopathy 
is limited by high early mortality rate (36% at 30 
days) associated with surgical revascularization in 
this patient population.29
Table 24. Drug-Drug Interactions With Statins and Immunosuppressants and Recommendations for Management
Immunosuppressant Statin Effect Magnitude Recommendation 
Cyclosporine/ 
tacrolimus/everolimus/
sirolimus*Atorvastatin Increased statin exposure 
through multiple mechanisms.
Increased risk for muscle-related 
toxicity.Severe
6- to 15-fold increase in AUC of atorvastatinLimit dose of atorvastatin to 10 
mg daily
Rosuvastatin Severe
7-fold increase in AUC of rosuvastatinLimit dose of rosuvastatin to 5 
mg daily
Pravastatin Severe
5- to 10-fold increase in AUC of pravastatinLimit dose of pravastatin to 40 
mg daily
Fluvastatin Moderate
2- to 4-fold increase in AUC of fluvastatinLimit dose of fluvastatin
40 mg daily
Simvastatin Severe
6- to 8-fold increase in AUC of simvastatinAvoid combination
Lovastatin Severe
5- to 20-fold increase in AUC of lovastatinAvoid combination
Pitavastatin Severe
5-fold increase in AUC of pitavastatinAvoid combination
Magnitude of drug-drug interactions based on AUC increase: minor, >1.25 to <2; moderate, ≥2 to 4.9; and severe, ≥5. 
*Changes in magnitude of statin AUC are reported with cyclosporine. Limited data exist with tacrolimus, everolimus, and sirolimus.
AUC indicates area under the curve.
Adapted with permission from Wiggins BS, et al.30 Copyright 2016 American Heart Association, Inc.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on November 12, 2025

CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINESCirculation. 2023;148:e9–e119. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000001168 August 29, 2023
Virani et al 2023 AHA/ACC/ACCP/ASPC/NLA/PCNA Chronic Coronary Disease Guideline e797 . PATIENT FOLLOW-UP: MONITORING 
AND MANAGING SYMPTOMS
7 .1. Follow-Up Plan and Testing in Stable 
Patients
Recommendations for Follow-Up Plan and Testing in Stable Patients 
Referenced studies that support the recommendations are  
summarized in the Online Data Supplement. 
COR LOE Recommendations 
2b B-R 1. In stable patients with CCD and with previous ACS 
or coronary revascularization, referral to telehealth 
programs, community-based programs, or both 
for lifestyle interventions may be reasonable as an 
adjunct to usual care to improve management of 
cardiovascular risk factors.1–7
3: No 
benefitB-R 2. In patients with CCD without a change in clinical 
or functional status on optimized GDMT, routine 
periodic testing with coronary CTA or stress testing 
with or without imaging is not recommended to 
guide therapeutic decision-making.8–10
3: No 
benefitB-R 3. In patients with CCD without a change in clinical 
or functional status, routine periodic reassessment 
of L V function is not recommended to guide thera-
peutic decision-making.11,12
3: Harm B-NR 4. In patients with CCD without a change in clinical or 
functional status, routine periodic invasive coronary 
angiography should not be performed to guide 
therapeutic decision-making.13–17
Synopsis
Patients with CCD are at elevated risk for future MACE 
and should be observed periodically in the outpatient 
setting.18,19 Central components of the management of 
patients with CCD include long-term risk factor modi-
fication and active management of GDMT to achieve 
maximally tolerated doses,20 with shared decision-
making involving effective communication between 
cardiologists, primary, and specialty care teams (see  
Section 4.1, “General Approach to Treatment Deci-
sions,” Section 4.1.1, “Team-Based Approach,” Section 
4.1.2, “Patient Education,” and Section 4.1.4, “Social 
Determinants of Health”).21–23 Over the past 2 decades, 
rates of MACE in patients with CCD have declined, and 
contemporary studies suggest overall low event rates in 
patients with CCD on GDMT, especially in the absence 
of anginal symptoms.19,24 After index diagnostic evalua-
tion, treatment, and optimization of lifestyle and medical 
interventions, follow-up testing should be reserved for 
instances when there has been a significant change in 
symptom and/or clinical status. Periodic recording of 
the standard resting 12-lead ECG in patients with CCD 
may provide a baseline waveform against which future 
tracings taken during symptoms may be reasonably 
compared to avoid overdiagnosis of a change in clini-
cal status.14,15 Patients with CCD who have accelerat-
ing symptoms or decreasing functional capacity despite 
optimized GDMT should undergo assessment as per Section 3 (“Evaluation, Diagnosis, and Risk Stratifica-
tion”). Recommendations regarding CR can be found in 
Section 4.2.10.
Recommendation-Specific Supportive Text
 1. A Dutch multicenter trial randomized 374 adults 
<8 weeks after hospitalization for ACS to usual 
care plus telehealth coaching with the lifestyle 
intervention “Hartcoach” every 4 weeks versus 
usual care alone.1 After 6 months of follow-up, 
patients randomized to Hartcoach had modest 
improvement in BMI, waist circumference, physi-
cal activity, intake of vegetables, self-manage-
ment, and anxiety. An Australian trial randomized 
430 adults with previous MI to a telephone-
delivered 6-month secondary prevention pro-
gram (“Proactive Heart”) versus usual care.2 
Patients in the intervention group had signifi-
cantly improved health outcomes as assessed by 
health-related QOL and physical activity surveys, 
including anxiety outcomes.3 A subsequent ran-
domized trial of 121 adults found that a 6-month 
telehealth program (MoodCare) improved 
depression scores in patients post-ACS com-
pared with usual care,4 and effects persisted 
at 1-year follow-up in those with major depres-
sive disorder.5 In the RESPONSE-2 (Ruxolitinib 
Efficacy and Safety in Patients with HU Resistant 
or Intolerant Polycythemia Vera versus Best 
Available Therapy) trial, nurse-coordinated refer-
ral of 711 patients with previous ACS, coronary 
revascularization, or both and their partners to 3 
widely available community-based lifestyle pro-
grams in 15 hospitals in the Netherlands led to 
significant improvements in lifestyle-related fac-
tors.6 Text messaging interventions may7 or may 
not25,26 be beneficial. The cost-effectiveness of 
such approaches remains uncertain.27
 2. The evidence base surrounding the long-term 
prognosis and appropriate management of the 
spectrum of contemporary patients with CCD is 
evolving. Routine periodic anatomic or ischemic 
testing in asymptomatic, nonsedentary patients 
is not recommended. Limited data are available 
to guide management of asymptomatic patients 
with CCD on GDMT who receive functional or 
anatomic testing and have a positive result. In the 
ISCHEMIA trial, 5179 patients with stable CAD 
and site-determined moderate-severe ischemia 
on stress testing were randomized to invasive ver-
sus conservative care strategies, with no differ-
ence in the composite primary MACE endpoint at 
3.3 years of follow-up.8 Only patients presenting 
with daily, weekly, or monthly angina experienced 
prompt and durable improvement in symptoms 
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on November 12, 2025

CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINESAugust 29, 2023 Circulation. 2023;148:e9–e119. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000001168
Virani et al 2023 AHA/ACC/ACCP/ASPC/NLA/PCNA Chronic Coronary Disease Guideline e80when randomized to invasive compared with 
conservative management.28 In the CLARIFY 
(Prospective Observational Longitudinal Registry 
of Patients with Stable Coronary Artery Disease) 
registry of 32 105 outpatients with CCD across 
45 countries, anginal symptoms during noninva-
sive testing, but not silent ischemia, were asso-
ciated with increased risk of MACE, including 
cardiovascular death or nonfatal MI.9 Recently, 
the multicenter, POST-PCI (Pragmatic Trial 
Comparing Symptom-Oriented versus Routine 
Stress Testing in High-Risk Patients Undergoing 
Percutaneous Coronary Intervention) RCT com-
pared a strategy of routine functional stress test-
ing (using exercise ECG with or without nuclear 
myocardial perfusion imaging or stress echo-
cardiography) versus standard care alone 12 
months after successful PCI in 1706 high-risk 
patients. At 2 years of follow-up, no differences 
were observed between groups in the primary 
endpoint of composite death, MI or hospitaliza-
tion for unstable angina.10
 3. Routine, periodic reassessment of L V function in 
asymptomatic patients without a change in func-
tional status or clinical intervention is not recom-
mended.11 In a post-hoc analysis of the RCT MASS 
II in which patients with multivessel CCD treated 
by CABG, PCI, or medial therapy underwent evalu-
ation of L VEF before randomization and after 10 
years of follow-up (n=350), L VEF was stable over 
long-term follow-up in the absence of MACE.12
 4. Asymptomatic patients in the ISCHEMIA trial did 
not derive a benefit when randomized to inva-
sive compared with conservative management.8,28 
Routine follow-up invasive coronary angiography 
has been associated with increased revasculariza-
tion of nonischemic intermediate lesions without an 
improvement in rates of subsequent cardiac death 
or MI.16,17 The ReACT (Randomized Evaluation of 
Routine Follow-up Coronary Angiography after 
PCI) trial was a prospective multicenter open-
label trial in Japan in which 700 patients were 
randomized to receive routine follow-up coronary 
angiography 8 to 12 months after PCI versus clini-
cal follow-up alone.14 During median follow-up of 
4.6 years, no clinical benefit was seen for routine 
follow-up coronary angiography despite increased 
early coronary revascularization rates. Routine 
angiographic follow-up after PCI in patients with 
diabetes was associated with an increased inci-
dence of revascularization and MACE without a 
change in death or reinfarction rates.29 In a con-
temporary Danish registry of patients with CCD, 
revascularization in those without ischemia con-
ferred a higher risk of death and MI versus medical 
therapy alone.158. OTHER IMPORTANT CONSIDERATIONS
8.1. Cost and Value Considerations
Recommendation for Cost and Value Considerations
Referenced studies that support the recommendation are  
summarized in the Online Data Supplement. 
COR LOE Recommendation 
1 B-NR 1. When discussing treatment and prevention with 
patients who have CCD, it is recommended that 
the health care team discuss out-of-pocket costs 
for medications at the time of initiating a new med-
ication and at least annually thereafter to preempt 
cost-related nonadherence.1–6
Synopsis
Some new CCD therapies are only available as branded 
formulations, and their high out-of-pocket costs can im-
pede adoption or increase the risk of cost-related non-
adherence.1,2 High out-of-pocket costs is a frequently 
cited reason for patients foregoing medications, delaying 
a prescription refill, or skipping or reducing medication 
doses.3 The use of high-cost therapies in a large num-
ber of eligible patients increases pharmaceutical spend-
ing, which, in the long term, gets passed to the patient 
in the form of higher insurance premiums (in the case 
of private insurance) and to the taxpayer in the form of 
higher taxes (in the case of public insurance). There-
fore, clinicians have a key role in ensuring access and 
adherence to effective therapies by regularly discuss-
ing out-of-pocket costs with their patients with CCD as 
a part of shared decision-making, using lower-cost al-
ternatives when available, and guiding health systems  
to adopt cost-effective therapies when >1 alternative 
is appropriate (ie, choosing therapies that require lower 
incremental spending to generate 1 additional unit of 
health and meet conventional cost-effectiveness thresh-
olds). For Level of Value Considerations, refer to Table 1. 
Refer also to the lipid management, SGL T2, and revas-
cularization sections (4.2.6, 4.2.8, and 5.1) for applicable 
cost-value considerations.
Recommendation-Specific Supportive Text
 1. One in 8 persons with CVD in the United States 
reports cost-related medication nonadherence.3 
Patients may be responsible for hundreds of dol-
lars in out-of-pocket costs for their prescriptions, 
which can be a barrier to initiating or continuing an 
effective therapy.1,2 Most patients report a desire 
to discuss out-of-pockets with their clinicians, 
particularly when considering a new therapy.4–6 
Clinicians and their support team should familiar-
ize themselves with out-of-pocket costs for com-
monly prescribed drugs but recognize that these 
may vary among patients by benefit design, time 
of year (eg, whether the annual deductible has 
been met), and concurrent medications. Clinicians 
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on November 12, 2025

CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINESCirculation. 2023;148:e9–e119. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000001168 August 29, 2023
Virani et al 2023 AHA/ACC/ACCP/ASPC/NLA/PCNA Chronic Coronary Disease Guideline e81or their care support team should identify the best 
source of out-of-pocket costs in their health sys-
tems; in some cases, information may be readily 
available in the electronic health record at the 
point of order entry, but in others, clinicians may 
have to order “test prescriptions” to ascertain cov-
erage. Clinicians or their care support team should 
review each patient’s out-of-pocket costs when 
starting a new medication and periodically there-
after. Shared decision-making (Section 4.1.3) with 
patients is paramount because affordability may 
vary substantially based on the patient’s socioeco-
nomic status (Section 4.1.4, “Social Determinants 
of Health”). Clinicians or their care support team 
should inform patients of cost-saving approaches 
such as the use of mail order pharmacies or patient 
assistance programs or consider lower-cost alter-
natives when appropriate.
8.2. Evidence Gaps and Areas of Future 
Research Needs
Although the past decade has seen numerous advance-
ments in the diagnosis and treatment of patients with 
CCD, several gaps still exist in our understanding. These 
gaps should serve as areas of future research and are 
described below.
 • With an evolving definition of patients who have CCD, 
research is needed to determine how advances in 
noninvasive imaging technology (ie, allowing sensi-
tive detection and quantification of calcified and non-
calcified atherosclerotic plaque burden) may affect 
identification of patients with CCD, their prognosti-
cation, and their eligibility for preventive therapies.
 • Comprehensive risk scores need to be developed 
and validated for MACE in patients with CCD in the 
contemporary era that include patient demograph-
ics, medical information, social determinants, and 
data from noninvasive test results, or invasive test 
results, or both.
 • Although studies have shown deficiencies with cli-
nician-estimation of patient’s symptoms, research 
is needed to understand whether routine use of 
patient-reported measures in clinical care improve 
patient-centered outcomes.
 • Decision aids that are tested and validated in 
diverse populations are needed to support shared 
decision-making in patients with CCD.
 • High-quality studies are needed to assess the 
effect of various substances, including marijuana, 
on cardiovascular outcomes in patients with CCD.
 • With several therapies available to treat symptoms 
or improve outcomes in patients with CCD, research 
is needed on how to sequence GDMT in patients 
with CCD (ie, how to judge relative importance of 
different components of GDMT in specific patients). • Randomized trials with longer-term cardiovascular 
outcomes are needed to determine the effective-
ness of interventions that limit sedentary time.
 • Research is needed to understand whether the 
efficacy of therapies used in patients with CCD 
is uniform across men and women with CCD and 
across various racial and ethnic groups of patients 
with CCD that have traditionally been underrepre-
sented in clinical trials.
 • Further research is needed to assess the use of 
personalized medicine approaches, including the 
assessment of the use of artificial intelligence, text 
messaging, wearable technology, genomics, and 
proteomics to improve risk assessment and treat-
ment approaches in diverse populations of patients 
with CCD.
 • Additional research is needed to assess the effect 
of hybrid CR, as well as home-based CR, on longer-
term clinical outcomes and on outcomes for vari-
ous population subgroups, including women, older 
adults, and those from underrepresented racial and 
ethnic groups.
 • Future research is needed on patients with CCD on 
the long-term effect of treatment of mental health 
conditions (namely depression): (1) patients with a 
previous (known) diagnosis of mental health condi-
tion and concomitant CCD, or (2) patients with a 
new diagnosis of a mental health condition after MI.
 • Future research is needed on the long-term risk of 
e-cigarette use on cardiovascular health in patients 
with CCD.
 • Further research is needed on whether there is 
utility for the use of GLP-1 receptor agonists in 
patients with CCD but not type 2 diabetes for car-
diovascular risk reduction. Research is also needed 
to determine whether there is utility for the com-
bined use of SGL T2 inhibitors and GLP-1 receptor 
agonists in patients with CCD.
 • Further research is needed on the optimal anti-
platelet regimen choices for patients with CCD 
who are 1 year post-MI or PCI.
 • Further research is needed on what is the optimal 
antithrombotic strategy in patients with CCD and 
atrial fibrillation.
 • In patients with CCD and refractory angina, 
research is needed to assess the utility of neuro-
modulation and thoracic spinal cord stimulation, 
therapeutic angiogenesis with cell/gene therapies, 
coronary sinus occlusion, and shockwave therapy.
 • Additional research is needed in populations with 
SCAD to determine optimal pharmacological man-
agement strategy after SCAD and the potential 
impact of vasculopathy screening on future cardio-
vascular outcomes.
 • As climate change–related extreme environmen-
tal events become more severe and more intense, 
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on November 12, 2025

CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINESAugust 29, 2023 Circulation. 2023;148:e9–e119. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000001168
Virani et al 2023 AHA/ACC/ACCP/ASPC/NLA/PCNA Chronic Coronary Disease Guideline e82high-quality research is needed to examine whether 
preventative strategies—such as indoor air purifi-
ers and N95 masks during periods of substantial 
wildfire smoke exposure or public spaces with air-
conditioning during extreme heat—are protective 
in patients with CCD who are at increased risk of 
cardiovascular events.
 • Research is needed to explore how to best integrate 
SDOH into electronic health records to enable 
practitioners to coordinate care for patients with 
CCD challenged with health inequities.
 • Although some electronic health records allow esti-
mation of patient out-of-pocket costs for medica-
tions, testing, and treatments, more work is needed 
in development and dissemination of tools to allow 
clinicians to determine patient costs accurately at 
the point of care.
 • Research is needed to determine whether GDMT is 
associated with improved outcomes in older adults 
with CCD or patients with CCD on hemodialysis.
 • Studies are needed to assess which interventions lead 
to effective guideline implementation in clinical prac-
tice. Similarly, research is needed to assess the effect 
of a new guideline release at the patient, clinic, hospi-
tal, health care systems, and the community levels.
PEER REVIEW COMMITTEE MEMBERS
H. Vernon Anderson, MD, FAHA, FACC, Chair*; Sunil V. Rao, 
MD, FACC, Vice Chair* ; Columbus Batiste II, MD, FACC; 
Roger Blumenthal, MD, FAHA, FACC; Matthew A. Caven-
der, MD, MPH, FACC; Anne Carol Goldberg, MD, FNLA, 
FAHA† ; Cynthia Jackevicius, BScPhm, PharmD, MSc, 
BCPS, BCCP, FAHA, FACC, FCCP‡ ; Friederike K. Keating, 
MD, FACC; Thomas S. Metkus, MD, PhD, FACC; Leslee J. 
Shaw, PhD, FACC, FAHA; Chloe D. Villavaso, MN, APRN, 
FPCNA, AACC§ ; Brittany A. Zwischenberger, MD, MHS
AHA/ACC JOINT COMMITTEE ON 
CLINICAL PRACTICE GUIDELINES
Joshua A. Beckman, MD, MS, FAHA, FACC, Chair; Cath-
erine M. Otto, MD, FACC, FAHA, Chair-Elect; Patrick T. 
O’Gara, MD, MACC, FAHA, Immediate Past Chair||; An-
astasia Armbruster, PharmD, FACC; Kim K. Birtcher, Phar-
mD, MS, AACC||; Leslie L. Davis, PhD, ANP-BC, FACC, 
FAHA, FPCNA; Lisa de las Fuentes, MD, MS, FAHA; 
Anita Deswal, MD, MPH, FACC, FAHA; Dave L. Dixon, 
PharmD, FAHA, FACC, FCCP, FNLA||; Victor A. Ferrari, 
MD, FACC, FAHA; Bulent Gorenek, MD, FACC||; Norrisa 
Haynes, MD, MPH||; Adrian F. Hernandez, MD, FAHA; José A. Joglar, MD, FAHA, FACC||; Heather M. Johnson, 
MD, MS, FAHA, FACC, FASPC; W. Schuyler Jones, MD, 
FACC; Prateeti Khazanie, MD; Michelle Kittleson, MD, 
PhD, FAHA; Daniel B. Mark, MD, MPH, FACC||; Debabrata 
Mukherjee, MD, FACC, FAHA, FSCAI; Latha Palaniappan, 
MD, MS, FAHA, FACC||; Mariann R. Piano, RN, PhD, 
FAHA||; Tanveer Rab, MD, FACC; Erica S. Spatz, MD, 
MHS, FACC||; Jacqueline E. Tamis-Holland, MD, FACC, 
FAHA; Y. Joseph Woo, MD, FACC, FAHA; Boback Ziaeian, 
MD, PhD, FAHA
PRESIDENTS AND STAFF
American College of Cardiology
B. Hadley Wilson, MD, FACC, President
Cathleen C. Gates, Chief Executive Officer
Richard J. Kovacs, MD, MACC, Chief Medical Adviser
MaryAnne Elma, MPH, Senior Director, Enterprise Con-
tent and Digital Strategy
Grace D. Ronan, Team Leader, Clinical Policy Publications
Leah Patterson, Project Manager, Clinical Content 
Development
American College of Cardiology/American 
Heart Association
Thomas S.D. Getchius, National Senior Director, Guide-
lines
Abdul R. Abdullah, MD, Director, Guideline Science and 
Methodology
American Heart Association
Michelle A. Albert, MD, MPH, FAHA, President
Nancy Brown, Chief Executive Officer
Mariell Jessup, MD, FAHA, Chief Science and Medical 
Officer
Radhika Rajgopal Singh, PhD, Senior Vice President, 
Office of Science and Medicine
Prashant Nedungadi, BPharm, PhD, Vice President, Sci-
ence and Medicine, Clinical Guidelines
Jody Hundley, Senior Production and Operations Man-
ager, Scientific Publications, Office of Science Oper-
ations
ARTICLE INFORMATION 
This document was approved by the American College of Cardiology Clini-
cal Policy Approval Committee and the American Heart Association Science  
Advisory and Coordinating Committee in January 2023, and the American Col-
lege of Cardiology Science and Quality Committee and the American Heart As-
sociation Executive Committee in April 2023.
Supplemental Materials are available with this article at https://www.ahajournals.
org/doi/suppl/10.1161/CIR.0000000000001168
*ACC/AHA representative. †National Lipid Association representative. ‡American 
College of Clinical Pharmacy representative. §Preventive Cardiovascular Nurses 
Association representative. ||Former Joint Committee on Clinical Practice 
Guideline member; current member during the writing effort.||Former Joint Committee on Clinical Practice Guideline member; current member 
during the writing effort.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on November 12, 2025

CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINESCirculation. 2023;148:e9–e119. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000001168 August 29, 2023
Virani et al 2023 AHA/ACC/ACCP/ASPC/NLA/PCNA Chronic Coronary Disease Guideline e83This article has been copublished in the Journal of the American College of 
Cardiology.
Copies: This document is available on the websites of the American Heart As-
sociation (professional.heart.org) and the American College of Cardiology (www.
acc.org). A copy of the document is also available at https://professional.heart.org/
statements by selecting the “Guidelines & Statements” button. To purchase addi-
tional reprints, call 215-356-2721 or email Meredith.Edelman@wolterskluwer.com.
The expert peer review of AHA-commissioned documents (eg, scientific 
statements, clinical practice guidelines, systematic reviews) is conducted by the 
AHA Office of Science Operations. For more on AHA statements and guidelines 
development, visit https://professional.heart.org/statements. Select the “Guide-
lines & Statements” drop-down menu near the top of the webpage, then click 
“Publication Development.”
Permissions: Multiple copies, modification, alteration, enhancement, and/or 
distribution of this document are not permitted without the express permission 
of the American Heart Association. Instructions for obtaining permission are lo-
cated at https://www.heart.org/permissions. A link to the “Copyright Permissions 
Request Form” appears in the second paragraph (https://www.heart.org/en/ 
aboutus/statements-and-policies/copyright-request-form).
REFERENCES
PREAMBLE
 1. Committee on Standards for Systematic Reviews of Comparitive Effective-
ness Research, Institute of Medicine (US). Finding What Works in Health-
care: Standards for Systematic Reviews. National Academies Press; 2011
 2. Committee on Standards for Developing Trustworthy Clinical Practice 
Guidelines, Institute of Medicine (US). Clinical Practice Guidelines We Can 
Trust. National Academies Press; 2011.
 3. Anderson JL, Heidenreich PA, Barnett PG, et al. ACC/AHA statement on 
cost/value methodology in clinical practice guidelines and performance 
measures: a report of the American College of Cardiology/American Heart 
Association Task Force on Performance Measures and Task Force on Prac-
tice Guidelines. Circulation. 2014;129:2329–2345.
 4. ACCF/AHA Task Force on Practice Guidelines. Methodology Manual and 
Policies From the ACCF/AHA Task Force on Practice Guidelines. American 
College of Cardiology and American Heart Association. 2010. Accessed 
June 3, 2020. https://www.acc.org/Guidelines/About-Guidelines-and-
Clinical-Documents/Methodology and https://professional.heart.org/-/
media/phd-files/guidelines-and-statements/methodology_manual_and_
policies_ucm_319826.pdf.
 5. Halperin JL, Levine GN, Al-Khatib SM, et al. Further evolution of the ACC/
AHA clinical practice guideline recommendation classification system: a re-
port of the American College of Cardiology/American Heart Association 
Task Force on Clinical Practice Guidelines. Circulation. 2016;133:1426–
1428.
 6. Arnett DK, Goodman RA, Halperin JL, et al. AHA/ACC/HHS strategies to 
enhance application of clinical practice guidelines in patients with cardio-
vascular disease and comorbid conditions: from the American Heart As-
sociation, American College of Cardiology, and U.S. Department of Health 
and Human Services. Circulation. 2014;130:1662–1667 .
 7 . Levine GN, O’Gara PT, Beckman JA, et al. Recent innovations, modifications, 
and evolution of ACC/AHA clinical practice guidelines: an update for our 
constituencies: a report of the American College of Cardiology/American 
Heart Association Task Force on Clinical Practice Guidelines. Circulation. 
2019;139:e879–e886.
1.4. Scope of the Guideline
 1. Anderson JL, Heidenreich PA, Barnett PG, et al. ACC/AHA statement on 
cost/value methodology in clinical practice guidelines and performance 
measures: a report of the American College of Cardiology/American Heart 
Association Task Force on Performance Measures and Task Force on Prac-
tice Guidelines. Circulation. 2014;129:2329–2345.
 2. World Health Organization. CHOosing Interventions that are Cost Effective 
(WHO-CHOICE): cost-effectiveness thresholds. Accessed June 3, 2022. 
http://www.who.int/choice/en/.
 3. Fihn SD, Gardin JM, Abrams J, et al. 2012 ACCF/AHA/ACP/AATS/
PCNA/SCAI/STS guideline for the diagnosis and management of patients 
with stable ischemic heart disease: a report of the American College of 
Cardiology Foundation/American Heart Association Task Force on Practice 
Guidelines, and the American College of Physicians, American Association 
for Thoracic Surgery, Preventive Cardiovascular Nurses Association, Society for Cardiovascular Angiography and Interventions, and Society of Thoracic 
Surgeons. Circulation. 2012;126:e354–e471.
 4. Fihn SD, Blankenship JC, Alexander KP, et al. 2014 ACC/AHA/AATS/
PCNA/SCAI/STS focused update of the guideline for the diagnosis and 
management of patients with stable ischemic heart disease: a report of 
the American College of Cardiology/American Heart Association Task 
Force on Practice Guidelines, and the American Association for Thoracic 
Surgery, Preventive Cardiovascular Nurses Association, Society for Car-
diovascular Angiography and Interventions, and Society of Thoracic Sur-
geons. Circulation. 2014;130:1749–1767 .
 5. Wright RS, Anderson JL, Adams CD, et al. 2011 ACCF/AHA focused 
update incorporated into the ACC/AHA 2007 guidelines for the man-
agement of patients with unstable angina/non-ST-elevation myocardial 
infarction: a report of the American College of Cardiology Foundation/
American Heart Association Task Force on Practice Guidelines. Circulation. 
2011;123:e426–e579.
 6. Gulati M, Levy PD, Mukherjee D, et al. 2021 AHA/ACC/ASE/CHEST/
SAEM/SCCT/SCMR guideline for the evaluation and diagnosis of chest 
pain: a report of the American College of Cardiology/American Heart 
Association Joint Committee on Clinical Practice Guidelines. Circulation. 
2021;144:e368–e454.
 7 . Arnett DK, Blumenthal RS, Albert MA, et al. 2019 ACC/AHA guideline on 
the primary prevention of cardiovascular disease: a report of the American 
College of Cardiology/American Heart Association Task Force on Clinical 
Practice Guidelines. Circulation. 2019;140:e596–e646.
 8. Lawton JS, Tamis-Holland JE, Bangalore S, et al. 2021 ACC/AHA/SCAI 
guideline for coronary artery revascularization: a report of the American Col-
lege of Cardiology/American Heart Association Joint Committee on Clinical 
Practice Guidelines. Circulation. 2022;145:e18–e114.
 9. O’Gara PT, Kushner FG, Ascheim DD, et al. 2013 ACCF/AHA guideline 
for the management of ST-elevation myocardial infarction: a report of the 
American College of Cardiology Foundation/American Heart Association 
Task Force on Practice Guidelines. Circulation. 2013;127:e362–e425.
 10. Grundy SM, Stone NJ, Bailey AL, et al. 2018 AHA/ACC/AACVPR/AAPA/
ABC/ACPM/ADA/AGS/APhA/ASPC/NLA/PCNA guideline on the man-
agement of blood cholesterol: a report of the American College of Cardiol-
ogy/American Heart Association Task Force on Clinical Practice Guidelines. 
Circulation. 2019;139:e1082–e1143.
 11. Smith SC Jr, Benjamin EJ, Bonow RO, et al. AHA/ACCF secondary preven-
tion and risk reduction therapy for patients with coronary and other ath-
erosclerotic vascular disease: 2011 update: a guideline from the American 
Heart Association and American College of Cardiology Foundation. Circula-
tion. 2019;139:e1082–e1143.
 12. Jensen MD, Ryan DH, Apovian CM, et al. 2013 AHA/ACC/TOS guideline 
for the management of overweight and obesity in adults: a report of the 
American College of Cardiology/American Heart Association Task Force on 
Practice Guidelines and The Obesity Society. Circulation. 2014;129:S102–
S138.
 13. Levine GN, Bates ER, Bittl JA, et al. 2016 ACC/AHA guideline focused 
update on duration of dual antiplatelet therapy in patients with coronary 
artery disease: a report of the American College of Cardiology/American 
Heart Association Task Force on Clinical Practice Guidelines. Circulation. 
2016;134:e123–e155.
 14. Al-Khatib SM, Stevenson WG, Ackerman MJ, et al. 2017 AHA/ACC/HRS 
guideline for management of patients with ventricular arrhythmias and the 
prevention of sudden cardiac death: a report of the American College of 
Cardiology/American Heart Association Task Force on Clinical Practice 
Guidelines and the Heart Rhythm Society. Circulation. 2018;138:e272–
e391.
 15. Whelton PK, Carey RM, Aronow WS, et al. 2017 ACC/AHA/AAPA/ABC/
ACPM/AGS/APhA/ASH/ASPC/NMA/PCNA guideline for the prevention, 
detection, evaluation, and management of high blood pressure in adults: a 
report of the American College of Cardiology/American Heart Association 
Task Force on Clinical Practice Guidelines. Hypertension. 2018;71:e13–
e115.
 16. January CT, Wann LS, Calkins H, et al. 2019 AHA/ACC/HRS focused up-
date of the 2014 AHA/ACC/HRS guideline for the management of pa-
tients with atrial fibrillation: a report of the American College of Cardiology/
American Heart Association Task Force on Clinical Practice Guidelines and 
the Heart Rhythm Society. Circulation. 2019;140:e125–e151.
 17 . Otto CM, Nishimura RA, Bonow RO, et al. 2020 ACC/AHA guideline for the 
management of patients with valvular heart disease: a report of the Ameri-
can College of Cardiology/American Heart Association Joint Committee on 
Clinical Practice Guidelines. Circulation. 2021;143:e72–e227 .
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on November 12, 2025

CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINESAugust 29, 2023 Circulation. 2023;148:e9–e119. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000001168
Virani et al 2023 AHA/ACC/ACCP/ASPC/NLA/PCNA Chronic Coronary Disease Guideline e84 18. Heidenreich PA, Bozkurt B, Aguilar D, et al. 2022 AHA/ACC/HFSA guide-
line for the management of heart failure: a report of the American College of 
Cardiology/American Heart Association Joint Committee on Clinical Prac-
tice Guidelines. Circulation. 2022;145:e895–e1032.
 19. Balady GJ, Williams MA, Ades PA, et al. Core components of cardiac rehabil-
itation/secondary prevention programs: 2007 update: a scientific statement 
from the American Heart Association Exercise, Cardiac Rehabilitation, and 
Prevention Committee, the Council on Clinical Cardiology; the Councils on 
Cardiovascular Nursing, Epidemiology and Prevention, and Nutrition, Physi-
cal Activity, and Metabolism; and the American Association of Cardiovascu-
lar and Pulmonary Rehabilitation. Circulation. 2007;115:2675–2682.
 20. Levine GN, Steinke EE, Bakaeen FG, et al. Sexual activity and cardiovas-
cular disease: a scientific statement from the American Heart Association. 
Circulation. 2012;125:1058–1072.
 21. Lichtman JH, Froelicher ES, Blumenthal JA, et al. Depression as a risk 
factor for poor prognosis among patients with acute coronary syndrome: 
systematic review and recommendations: a scientific statement from the 
American Heart Association. Circulation. 2014;129:1350–1369.
 22. Rosendorff C, Lackland DT, Allison M, et al. Treatment of hypertension in pa-
tients with coronary artery disease: a scientific statement from the American 
Heart Association, American College of Cardiology, and American Society 
of Hypertension. Hypertension. 2015;65:1372–1407 .
 23. Wiggins BS, Saseen JJ, Page RL 2nd, et al. Recommendations for manage-
ment of clinically significant drug-drug interactions with statins and select 
agents used in patients with cardiovascular disease: a scientific statement 
from the American Heart Association. Circulation. 2016;134:e468–e495.
 24. Van Horn L, Carson JAS, Appel LJ, et al. Recommended dietary pattern to 
achieve adherence to the American Heart Association/American College of 
Cardiology (AHA/ACC) guidelines: a scientific statement from the Ameri-
can Heart Association. Circulation. 2016;134:e505–e529.
 25. Hayes SN, Kim ESH, Saw J, et al. Spontaneous coronary artery dissection: 
current state of the science: a scientific statement from the American Heart 
Association. Circulation. 2018;137:e523–e557 .
 26. Feinstein MJ, Hsue PY, Benjamin LA, et al. Characteristics, prevention, 
and management of cardiovascular disease in people living with HIV: a 
scientific statement from the American Heart Association. Circulation. 
2019;140:e98–e124.
 27 . Mehta LS, Warnes CA, Bradley E, et al. Cardiovascular considerations in 
caring for pregnant patients: a scientific statement from the American Heart 
Association. Circulation. 2020;141:e884–e903.
 28. Arnold SV, Bhatt DL, Barsness GW, et al. Clinical management of stable 
coronary artery disease in patients with type 2 diabetes mellitus: a sci-
entific statement from the American Heart Association. Circulation. 
2020;141:e779–e806.
 29. Levine GN. The mind-heart-body connection. Circulation. 2019;140:1363–
1365.
 30. Rajagopalan S, Brauer M, Bhatnagar A, et al. Personal-level protective ac-
tions against particulate matter air pollution exposure: a scientific statement 
from the American Heart Association. Circulation. 2020;142:e411–e431.
 31. Beavers CJ, Rodgers JE, Bagnola AJ, et al. Cardio-oncology drug interac-
tions: a scientific statement from the American Heart Association. Circula-
tion. 2022;145:e811–e838.
 32. Aronow WS, Fleg JL, Pepine CJ, et al. ACCF/AHA 2011 expert consensus 
document on hypertension in the elderly: a report of the American College of 
Cardiology Foundation Task Force on Clinical Expert Consensus Documents. 
Developed in collaboration with the American Academy of Neurology, Ameri-
can Geriatrics Society, American Society for Preventive Cardiology, Ameri-
can Society of Hypertension, American Society of Nephrology, Association 
of Black Cardiologists, and European Society of Hypertension. Circulation. 
2011;123:2434–2506.
 33. Patel MR, Bailey SR, Bonow RO, et al. ACCF/SCAI/AATS/AHA/ASE/
ASNC/HFSA/HRS/SCCM/SCCT/SCMR/STS 2012 appropriate use 
criteria for diagnostic catheterization: a report of the American College of 
Cardiology Foundation Appropriate Use Criteria Task Force, Society for 
Cardiovascular Angiography and Interventions, American Association for 
Thoracic Surgery, American Heart Association, American Society of Echo-
cardiography, American Society of Nuclear Cardiology, Heart Failure Society 
of America, Heart Rhythm Society, Society of Critical Care Medicine, So-
ciety of Cardiovascular Computed Tomography, Society for Cardiovascular 
Magnetic Resonance, and Society of Thoracic Surgeons. J Am Coll Cardiol. 
2012;59:1995–2027 .
 34. Barua RS, Rigotti NA, Benowitz NL, et al. 2018 ACC expert consensus 
decision pathway on tobacco cessation treatment: a report of the American 
College of Cardiology Task Force on Clinical Expert Consensus Documents. 
J Am Coll Cardiol. 2018;72:3332–3365. 35. Das SR, Everett BM, Birtcher KK, et al. 2020 Expert consensus decision 
pathway on novel therapies for cardiovascular risk reduction in patients with 
type 2 diabetes: a report of the American College of Cardiology Solution Set 
Oversight Committee. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2020;76:1117–1145.
 36. Virani SS, Morris PB, Agarwala A, et al. 2021 ACC expert consensus decision 
pathway on the management of ASCVD risk reduction in patients with per-
sistent hypertriglyceridemia: a report of the American College of Cardiology 
Solution Set Oversight Committee. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2021;78:960–993.
 37 . Kumbhani DJ, Cannon CP, Beavers CJ, et al. 2020 ACC expert consensus 
decision pathway for anticoagulant and antiplatelet therapy in patients with 
atrial fibrillation or venous thromboembolism undergoing percutaneous cor-
onary intervention or with atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease: a report of 
the American College of Cardiology Solution Set Oversight Committee. J 
Am Coll Cardiol. 2021;77:629–658.
 38. Lloyd-Jones DM, Allen NB, Anderson CAM, et al. Life's Essential 8: up-
dating and enhancing the American Heart Association's construct of 
cardiovascular health: a presidential advisory from the American Heart 
Association. Circulation. 2022;146:e18–e43.
1.5. Class of Recommendations and Level of Evidence
 1. ACCF/AHA Task Force on Practice Guidelines. Methodology Manual and 
Policies From the ACCF/AHA Task Force on Practice Guidelines. American 
College of Cardiology and American Heart Association. 2010. Accessed 
June 3, 2020. https://www.acc.org/Guidelines/About-Guidelines-and-
Clinical-Documents/Methodology and https://professional.heart.org/-/
media/phd-files/guidelines-and-statements/methodology_manual_and_
policies_ucm_319826.pdf.
 2. Fihn SD, Gardin JM, Abrams J, et al. 2012 ACCF/AHA/ACP/AATS/
PCNA/SCAI/STS guideline for the diagnosis and management of patients 
with stable ischemic heart disease: a report of the American College of 
Cardiology Foundation/American Heart Association Task Force on Practice 
Guidelines, and the American College of Physicians,  American Association 
for Thoracic Surgery, Preventive Cardiovascular Nurses Association, Society 
for Cardiovascular Angiography and Interventions,  and Society of Thoracic 
Surgeons. Circulation. 2012;126:e354–e471.  
2. Epidemiology
 1. Tsao CW, Aday AW, Almarzooq ZI, et al. Heart disease and stroke statis-
tics-2022 update: a report from the American Heart Association. Circulation. 
2022;145:e153–e639.
 2. Fihn SD, Gardin JM, Abrams J, et al. 2012 ACCF/AHA/ACP/AATS/
PCNA/SCAI/STS guideline for the diagnosis and management of patients 
with stable ischemic heart disease: a report of the American College of 
Cardiology Foundation/American Heart Association Task Force on Practice 
Guidelines, and the American College of Physicians, American Association 
for Thoracic Surgery, Preventive Cardiovascular Nurses Association, Society 
for Cardiovascular Angiography and Interventions, and Society of Thoracic 
Surgeons. Circulation. 2012;126:e354–e471.
 3. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention National Center for Health 
Statistics. Data from: National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey 
(NHANES) public use data files. 2022. Accessed June 3, 2020. https://
www.cdc.gov/nchs/nhanes/.
 4. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention National Center for Chronic 
Disease Prevention and Health Promotion. Data from: Behavioral Risk Fac-
tor Surveillance System (BRFSS) Prevalence and Trends Data. 2017 . Ac-
cessed June 3, 2020. https://www.cdc.gov/brfss/brfssprevalence/.
 5. Global Burden of Disease Study. Data from: Institute for Health Metrics and 
Evaluation. University of Washington. 2019. Accessed June 3, 2020. http://
ghdx.health-data.org/.
3.1. Diagnostic Evaluation
 1. Shaw LJ, Berman DS, Maron DJ, et al. Optimal medical therapy with or 
without percutaneous coronary intervention to reduce ischemic burden: 
results from the Clinical Outcomes Utilizing Revascularization and Ag-
gressive Drug Evaluation (COURAGE) trial nuclear substudy. Circulation. 
2008;117:1283–1291.
 2. Shaw LJ, Cerqueira MD, Brooks MM, et al. Impact of left ventricular function 
and the extent of ischemia and scar by stress myocardial perfusion imaging 
on prognosis and therapeutic risk reduction in diabetic patients with coro-
nary artery disease: results from the Bypass Angioplasty Revascularization 
Investigation 2 Diabetes (BARI 2D) trial. J Nucl Cardiol. 2012;19:658–669.
 3. Zellweger MJ, Fahrni G, Ritter M, et al. Prognostic value of “routine” cardiac 
stress imaging 5 years after percutaneous coronary intervention: the pro-
spective long-term observational BASKET (Basel Stent Kosteneffektivitats 
Trial) LATE IMAGING study. J Am Coll Cardiol Intv. 2014;7:615–621.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on November 12, 2025

CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINESCirculation. 2023;148:e9–e119. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000001168 August 29, 2023
Virani et al 2023 AHA/ACC/ACCP/ASPC/NLA/PCNA Chronic Coronary Disease Guideline e85 4. Zellweger MJ, Kaiser C, Jeger R, et al. Coronary artery disease progression 
late after successful stent implantation. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2012;59:793–799.
 5. Zellweger MJ, Kaiser C, Brunner-La Rocca HP, et al. Value and limitations 
of target-vessel ischemia in predicting late clinical events after drug-eluting 
stent implantation. J Nucl Med. 2008;49:550–556.
 6. Shaw LJ, Weintraub WS, Maron DJ, et al. Baseline stress myocardial perfu-
sion imaging results and outcomes in patients with stable ischemic heart 
disease randomized to optimal medical therapy with or without percutane-
ous coronary intervention. Am Heart J. 2012;164:243–250.
 7 . Patel KK, Spertus JA, Arnold SV, et al. Ischemia on PET MPI may identify 
patients with improvement in angina and health status post-revasculariza-
tion. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2019;74:1734–1736.
 8. Patel KK, Spertus JA, Chan PS, et al. Extent of myocardial ischemia on posi-
tron emission tomography and survival benefit with early revascularization. J 
Am Coll Cardiol. 2019;74:1645–1654.
 9. Reynolds HR, Shaw LJ, Min JK, et al. Association of sex with severity of 
coronary artery disease, ischemia, and symptom burden in patients with 
moderate or severe ischemia: secondary analysis of the ISCHEMIA ran-
domized clinical trial. JAMA Cardiol. 2020;5:773–786.
 10. Schwitter J, Wacker CM, van Rossum AC, et al. MR-IMPACT: comparison 
of perfusion-cardiac magnetic resonance with single-photon emission com-
puted tomography for the detection of coronary artery disease in a multi-
centre, multivendor, randomized trial. Eur Heart J. 2008;29:480–489.
 11. Schwitter J, Wacker CM, Wilke N, et al. MR-IMPACT II: Magnetic Resonance 
Imaging for Myocardial Perfusion Assessment in Coronary artery disease 
Trial: perfusion-cardiac magnetic resonance vs. single-photon emission 
computed tomography for the detection of coronary artery disease: a com-
parative multicentre, multivendor trial. Eur Heart J. 2013;34:775–781.
 12. Arai AE, Schulz-Menger J, Berman D, et al. Gadobutrol-enhanced cardiac 
magnetic resonance imaging for detection of coronary artery disease. J Am 
Coll Cardiol. 2020;76:1536–1547 .
 13. Takx RA, Blomberg BA, El Aidi H, et al. Diagnostic accuracy of stress 
myocardial perfusion imaging compared to invasive coronary angiogra-
phy with fractional flow reserve meta-analysis. Circ Cardiovasc Imaging. 
2015;8:e002666.
 14. Heitner JF, Kim RJ, Kim HW, et al. Prognostic value of vasodilator stress car-
diac magnetic resonance imaging: a multicenter study with 48000 patient-
years of follow-up. JAMA Cardiol. 2019;4:256–264.
 15. Kato S, Saito N, Nakachi T, et al. Stress perfusion coronary flow reserve 
versus cardiac magnetic resonance for known or suspected CAD. J Am Coll 
Cardiol. 2017;70:869–879.
 16. Vincenti G, Masci PG, Monney P, et al. Stress perfusion CMR in patients with 
known and suspected CAD: prognostic value and optimal ischemic thresh-
old for revascularization. J Am Coll Cardiol Img. 2017;10:526–537 .
 17 . Kwong RY, Ge Y, Steel K, et al. Cardiac magnetic resonance stress perfu-
sion imaging for evaluation of patients with chest pain. J Am Coll Cardiol. 
2019;74:1741–1755.
 18. Taqueti VR, Hachamovitch R, Murthy VL, et al. Global coronary flow reserve 
is associated with adverse cardiovascular events independently of luminal 
angiographic severity and modifies the effect of early revascularization. Cir-
culation. 2015;131:19–27 .
 19. Driessen RS, Danad I, Stuijfzand WJ, et al. Comparison of coronary comput-
ed tomography angiography, fractional flow reserve, and perfusion imaging 
for ischemia diagnosis. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2019;73:161–173.
 20. Danad I, Raijmakers PG, Driessen RS, et al. Comparison of coronary CT angiog-
raphy, SPECT, PET, and hybrid imaging for diagnosis of ischemic heart disease 
determined by fractional flow reserve. JAMA Cardiol. 2017;2:1100–1107 .
 21. Patel KK, Spertus JA, Chan PS, et al. Myocardial blood flow reserve as-
sessed by positron emission tomography myocardial perfusion imaging 
identifies patients with a survival benefit from early revascularization. Eur 
Heart J. 2020;41:759–768.
 22. Bom MJ, van Diemen PA, Driessen RS, et al. Prognostic value of [15O]
H2O positron emission tomography-derived global and regional myocardial 
perfusion. Eur Heart J Cardiovasc Imaging. 2020;21:777–786.
 23. Knott KD, Seraphim A, Augusto JB, et al. The prognostic significance of 
quantitative myocardial perfusion: an artificial intelligence-based approach 
using perfusion mapping. Circulation. 2020;141:1282–1291.
 24. Boden WE, O'Rourke RA, Teo KK, et al. Optimal medical therapy with or 
without PCI for stable coronary disease. N Engl J Med. 2007;356:1503–
1516.
 25. De Bruyne B, Pijls NH, Kalesan B, et al. Fractional flow reserve-guided 
PCI versus medical therapy in stable coronary disease. N Engl J Med. 
2012;367:991–1001.
 26. Maron DJ, Hochman JS, Reynolds HR, et al. Initial invasive or conservative 
strategy for stable coronary disease. N Engl J Med. 2020;382:1395–1407 . 27 . Spertus JA, Jones PG, Maron DJ, et al. Health-status outcomes with invasive 
or conservative care in coronary disease. N Engl J Med. 2020;382:1408–
1419.
 28. Frye RL, August P, Brooks MM, et al. Bari D. Study Group. A randomized trial 
of therapies for type 2 diabetes and coronary artery disease. N Engl J Med. 
2009;360:2503–2515.
 29. Patel KK, Al Badarin F, Chan PS, et al. Randomized comparison of clinical 
effectiveness of pharmacologic SPECT and PET MPI in symptomatic CAD 
patients. J Am Coll Cardiol Img. 2019;12:1821–1831.
 30. Ho PM, Rumsfeld JS, Peterson PN, et al. Chest pain on exercise treadmill 
test predicts future cardiac hospitalizations. Clin Cardiol. 2007;30:505–510.
 31. Hambrecht R, Walther C, Mobius-Winkler S, et al. Percutaneous coronary 
angioplasty compared with exercise training in patients with stable coronary 
artery disease: a randomized trial. Circulation. 2004;109:1371–1378.
 32. Jaureguizar KV, Vicente-Campos D, Bautista LR, et al. Effect of high-inten-
sity interval versus continuous exercise training on functional capacity and 
quality of life in patients with coronary artery disease: a randomized clinical 
trial. J Cardiopulm Rehabil Prev. 2016;36:96–105.
 33. Suh Y J, Hong Y J, Lee HJ, et al. Accuracy of CT for selecting candidates for 
coronary artery bypass graft surgery: combination with the SYNTAX score. 
Radiology. 2015;276:390–399.
 34. Chan M, Ridley L, Dunn DJ, et al. A systematic review and meta-analysis of 
multidetector computed tomography in the assessment of coronary artery 
bypass grafts. Int J Cardiol. 2016;221:898–905.
 35. Small GR, Yam Y, Chen L, et al. Prognostic assessment of coronary artery 
bypass patients with 64-slice computed tomography angiography: anatomi-
cal information is incremental to clinical risk prediction. J Am Coll Cardiol. 
2011;58:2389–2395.
 36. Andreini D, Modolo R, Katagiri Y, et al. Impact of fractional flow reserve derived 
from coronary computed tomography angiography on heart team treatment de-
cision-making in patients with multivessel coronary artery disease: insights from 
the SYNTAX III REVOLUTION Trial. Circ Cardiovasc Interv. 2019;12:e007607 .
 37 . Collet C, Onuma Y, Andreini D, et al. Coronary computed tomography an-
giography for heart team decision-making in multivessel coronary artery 
disease. Eur Heart J. 2018;39:3689–3698.
 38. Gulati M, Levy PD, Mukherjee D, et al. 2021 AHA/ACC/ASE/CHEST/SAEM/
SCCT/SCMR Guideline for the evaluation and diagnosis of chest pain: a report 
of the American College of Cardiology/American Heart Association Joint Com-
mittee on Clinical Practice Guidelines. Circulation. 2021;144:e368–e454.
 39. Lawton JS, Tamis-Holland JE, Bangalore S, et al. 2021 ACC/AHA/SCAI 
guideline for coronary artery revascularization: a report of the American Col-
lege of Cardiology/American Heart Association Joint Committee on Clinical 
Practice Guidelines. Circulation. 2022;145:e18–e114.
 40. Hachamovitch R, Rozanski A, Hayes SW, et al. Predicting therapeutic benefit 
from myocardial revascularization procedures: are measurements of both 
resting left ventricular ejection fraction and stress-induced myocardial isch-
emia necessary?. J Nucl Cardiol. 2006;13:768–778.
 41. Hachamovitch R, Hayes SW, Friedman JD, et al. Comparison of the short-
term survival benefit associated with revascularization compared with medi-
cal therapy in patients with no prior coronary artery disease undergoing 
stress myocardial perfusion single photon emission computed tomography. 
Circulation. 2003;107:2900–2907 .
 42. Hachamovitch R, Rozanski A, Shaw LJ, et al. Impact of ischaemia and scar 
on the therapeutic benefit derived from myocardial revascularization vs. 
medical therapy among patients undergoing stress-rest myocardial perfu-
sion scintigraphy. Eur Heart J. 2011;32:1012–1024.
 43. Nagel E, Greenwood JP, McCann GP, et al. Magnetic resonance perfusion or 
fractional flow reserve in coronary disease. N Engl J Med. 2019;380:2418–
2428.
 44. Shaw LJ, Vasey C, Sawada S, et al. Impact of gender on risk stratification 
by exercise and dobutamine stress echocardiography: long-term mortality in 
4234 women and 6898 men. Eur Heart J. 2005;26:447–456.
 45. Yao SS, Bangalore S, Chaudhry FA. Prognostic implications of stress echo-
cardiography and impact on patient outcomes: an effective gatekeeper 
for coronary angiography and revascularization. Am Soc Echocardiogr. 
2010;23:832–839.
 46. Al-Lamee R, Thompson D, Dehbi HM, et al. Percutaneous coronary inter-
vention in stable angina (ORBITA): a double-blind, randomised controlled 
trial. Lancet. 2018;391:31–40.
 47 . Frye RL, August P, et al.; BARI 2D Study Group. A randomized trial of 
therapies for type 2 diabetes and coronary artery disease. N Engl J Med. 
2009;360:2503–2515.
 48. Spertus JA, Jones PG, Maron DJ, et al. Health status after invasive or con-
servative care in coronary and advanced kidney disease. N Engl J Med. 
2020;382:1619–1628.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on November 12, 2025

CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINESAugust 29, 2023 Circulation. 2023;148:e9–e119. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000001168
Virani et al 2023 AHA/ACC/ACCP/ASPC/NLA/PCNA Chronic Coronary Disease Guideline e86 49. Weintraub WS, Hartigan PM, Mancini GBJ, et al. Effect of coronary anatomy 
and myocardial ischemia on long-term survival in patients with stable isch-
emic heart disease. Circ Cardiovasc Qual Outcomes. 2019;12:e005079.
 50. Taqueti VR, Shaw LJ, Cook NR, et al. Excess cardiovascular risk in wom-
en relative to men referred for coronary angiography is associated with  
severely impaired coronary flow reserve, not obstructive disease. Circulation. 
2017;135:566–577 .
 51. Taqueti VR, Solomon SD, Shah AM, et al. Coronary microvascular dysfunc-
tion and future risk of heart failure with preserved ejection fraction. Eur 
Heart J. 2018;39:840–849.
 52. Norgaard BL, Leipsic J, Gaur S, et al. Diagnostic performance of noninva-
sive fractional flow reserve derived from coronary computed tomography 
angiography in suspected coronary artery disease: the NXT trial (Analysis of 
Coronary Blood Flow Using CT Angiography: Next Steps). J Am Coll Cardiol. 
2014;63:1145–1155.
 53. Min JK, Leipsic J, Pencina MJ, et al. Diagnostic accuracy of fractional flow 
reserve from anatomic CT angiography. JAMA. 2012;308:1237–1245.
 54. Douglas PS, Pontone G, Hlatky MA, et al. Clinical outcomes of fractional 
flow reserve by computed tomographic angiography-guided diagnostic 
strategies vs. usual care in patients with suspected coronary artery disease: 
the prospective longitudinal trial of FFR(CT): outcome and resource impacts 
study. Eur Heart J. 2015;36:3359–3367 .
 55. Patel MR, Norgaard BL, Fairbairn TA, et al. 1-Y ear impact on medical prac-
tice and clinical outcomes of FFRCT: the ADVANCE registry. J Am Coll 
Cardiol Img. 2020;13:97–105.
3.2. Risk Stratification and Relationship to Treatment 
Selection
 1. Lauer MS, Pothier CE, Magid DJ, et al. An externally validated model for 
predicting long-term survival after exercise treadmill testing in patients with 
suspected coronary artery disease and a normal electrocardiogram. Ann In-
tern Med. 2007;147:821–828.
 2. Hadamitzky M, Freissmuth B, Meyer T, et al. Prognostic value of coronary 
computed tomographic angiography for prediction of cardiac events in 
patients with suspected coronary artery disease. J Am Coll Cardiol Img. 
2009;2:404–411.
 3. Heitner JF, Kim RJ, Kim HW, et al. Prognostic value of vasodilator stress car-
diac magnetic resonance imaging: a multicenter study with 48000 patient-
years of follow-up. JAMA Cardiol. 2019;4:256–264.
 4. Fordyce CB, Douglas PS, Roberts RS, et al. Identification of patients with 
stable chest pain deriving minimal value from noninvasive testing: the 
PROMISE minimal-risk tool, a secondary analysis of a randomized clinical 
trial. JAMA Cardiol. 2017;2:400–408.
 5. Boden WE, O'Rourke RA, Teo KK, et al. Optimal medical therapy with or 
without PCI for stable coronary disease. N Engl J Med. 2007;356:1503–
1516.
 6. Maron DJ, Hochman JS, Reynolds HR, et al. Initial invasive or conservative 
strategy for stable coronary disease. N Engl J Med. 2020;382:1395–1407 .
 7 . Frye RL, August P, Brooks MM, et al. Bari D. Study Group. A randomized trial 
of therapies for type 2 diabetes and coronary artery disease. N Engl J Med. 
2009;360:2503–2515.
 8. Lopes RD, Alexander KP, Stevens SR, et al. Initial invasive versus conserva-
tive management of stable ischemic heart disease in patients with a history of 
heart failure or left ventricular dysfunction. Circulation. 2020;142:1725–1735.
 9. Velazquez EJ, Lee KL, Deja MA, et al. Coronary-artery bypass surgery in 
patients with left ventricular dysfunction. N Engl J Med. 2011;364:1607–
1616.
 10. Reynolds HR, Shaw LJ, Min JK, et al. Outcomes in the ISCHEMIA trial 
based on coronary artery disease and ischemia severity. Circulation. 
2021;144:1024–1038.
 11. Weintraub WS, Hartigan PM, Mancini GBJ, et al. Effect of coronary anatomy 
and myocardial ischemia on long-term survival in patients with stable isch-
emic heart disease. Circ Cardiovasc Qual Outcomes. 2019;12:e005079.
 12. Gulati M, Levy PD, Mukherjee D, et al. 2021 AHA/ACC/ASE/CHEST/
SAEM/SCCT/SCMR Guideline for the evaluation and diagnosis of chest 
pain: a report of the American College of Cardiology/American Heart 
Association Joint Committee on Clinical Practice Guidelines. Circulation. 
2022;145:e18–e114.
 13. Smulders MW, Jaarsma C, Nelemans PJ, et al. Comparison of the prog-
nostic value of negative non-invasive cardiac investigations in patients with 
suspected or known coronary artery disease-a meta-analysis. Eur Heart J 
Cardiovasc Imaging. 2017;18:980–987 .
 14. Spertus JA, Jones PG, Maron DJ, et al. Health-status outcomes with invasive 
or conservative care in coronary disease. N Engl J Med. 2020;382:1408–
1419. 15. Abidov A, Bax JJ, Hayes SW, et al. Transient ischemic dilation ratio of the left ven-
tricle is a significant predictor of future cardiac events in patients with otherwise 
normal myocardial perfusion SPECT. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2003;42:1818–1825.
 16. Berman DS, Kang X, Hayes SW, et al. Adenosine myocardial perfusion sin-
gle-photon emission computed tomography in women compared with men. 
Impact of diabetes mellitus on incremental prognostic value and effect on 
patient management. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2003;41:1125–1133.
 17 . Cerci MS, Cerci JJ, Cerci RJ, et al. Myocardial perfusion imaging is a strong 
predictor of death in women. J Am Coll Cardiol Img. 2011;4:880–888.
 18. Dorbala S, Di Carli MF, Beanlands RS, et al. Prognostic value of stress myo-
cardial perfusion positron emission tomography: results from a multicenter 
observational registry. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2013;61:176–184.
 19. Greenwood JP, Herzog BA, Brown JM, et al. Prognostic value of cardiovas-
cular magnetic resonance and single-photon emission computed tomography 
in suspected coronary heart disease: long-term follow-up of a prospective, 
diagnostic accuracy cohort study. Ann Intern Med. 2016;165:1–9.
 20. Hachamovitch R, Hayes SW, Friedman JD, et al. Comparison of the short-
term survival benefit associated with revascularization compared with medi-
cal therapy in patients with no prior coronary artery disease undergoing 
stress myocardial perfusion single photon emission computed tomography. 
Circulation. 2003;107:2900–2907 .
 21. Hachamovitch R, Hayes SW, Friedman JD, et al. A prognostic score for pre-
diction of cardiac mortality risk after adenosine stress myocardial perfusion 
scintigraphy. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2005;45:722–729.
 22. Hachamovitch R, Rozanski A, Shaw LJ, et al. Impact of ischaemia and scar 
on the therapeutic benefit derived from myocardial revascularization vs. 
medical therapy among patients undergoing stress-rest myocardial perfu-
sion scintigraphy. Eur Heart J. 2011;32:1012–1024.
 23. Leischik R, Dworrak B, Littwitz H, et al. Prognostic significance of exercise 
stress echocardiography in 3329 outpatients (5-year longitudinal study). Int 
J Cardiol. 2007;119:297–305.
 24. Lertsburapa K, Ahlberg AW, Bateman TM, et al. Independent and incremen-
tal prognostic value of left ventricular ejection fraction determined by stress 
gated rubidium 82 PET imaging in patients with known or suspected coro-
nary artery disease. J Nucl Cardiol. 2008;15:745–753.
 25. Lima RS, De Lorenzo A, Pantoja MR, et al. Incremental prognostic value of 
myocardial perfusion 99m-technetium-sestamibi SPECT in the elderly. Int J 
Cardiol. 2004;93:137–143.
 26. Lindholm D, Lindback J, Armstrong PW, et al. Biomarker-based risk model 
to predict cardiovascular mortality in patients with stable coronary disease. 
J Am Coll Cardiol. 2017;70:813–826.
 27 . McCully RB, Roger VL, Mahoney DW, et al. Outcome after abnormal exer-
cise echocardiography for patients with good exercise capacity: prognostic 
importance of the extent and severity of exercise-related left ventricular 
dysfunction. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2002;39:1345–1352.
 28. Navare SM, Mather JF, Shaw LJ, et al. Comparison of risk stratification with 
pharmacologic and exercise stress myocardial perfusion imaging: a meta-
analysis. J Nucl Cardiol. 2004;11:551–561.
 29. Rai M, Baker WL, Parker MW, et al. Meta-analysis of optimal risk stratifica-
tion in patients >65 years of age. Am J Cardiol. 2012;110:1092–1099.
 30. Rozanski A, Gransar H, Min JK, et al. Long-term mortality following normal 
exercise myocardial perfusion SPECT according to coronary disease risk 
factors. J Nucl Cardiol. 2014;21:341–350.
 31. Sharir T, Kang X, Germano G, et al. Prognostic value of poststress left ven-
tricular volume and ejection fraction by gated myocardial perfusion SPECT 
in women and men: gender-related differences in normal limits and out-
comes. J Nucl Cardiol. 2006;13:495–506.
 32. Shaw LJ, Cerqueira MD, Brooks MM, et al. Impact of left ventricular function 
and the extent of ischemia and scar by stress myocardial perfusion imaging 
on prognosis and therapeutic risk reduction in diabetic patients with coro-
nary artery disease: results from the Bypass Angioplasty Revascularization 
Investigation 2 Diabetes (BARI 2D) trial. J Nucl Cardiol. 2012;19:658–669.
 33. Shaw LJ, Min JK, Hachamovitch R, et al. Nomograms for estimating cor-
onary artery disease prognosis with gated stress myocardial perfusion 
SPECT. J Nucl Cardiol. 2012;19:43–52.
 34. Van Tosh A, Supino PG, Nichols KJ, et al. Prognosis of a normal positron 
emission tomography 82Rb myocardial perfusion imaging study in women 
with no history of coronary disease. Cardiology. 2010;117:301–306.
 35. Weiner DA, Ryan T J, McCabe CH, et al. Prognostic importance of a clinical 
profile and exercise test in medically treated patients with coronary artery 
disease. J Am Coll Cardiol. 1984;3:772–779.
 36. Yao SS, Qureshi E, Sherrid MV, et al. Practical applications in stress 
echocardiography: risk stratification and prognosis in patients 
with known or suspected ischemic heart disease. J Am Coll Cardiol. 
2003;42:1084–1090.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on November 12, 2025

CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINESCirculation. 2023;148:e9–e119. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000001168 August 29, 2023
Virani et al 2023 AHA/ACC/ACCP/ASPC/NLA/PCNA Chronic Coronary Disease Guideline e87 37 . Bom MJ, van Diemen PA, Driessen RS, et al. Prognostic value of [15O]
H2O positron emission tomography-derived global and regional myocardial 
perfusion. Eur Heart J Cardiovasc Imaging. 2020;21:777–786.
 38. Kay J, Dorbala S, Goyal A, et al. Influence of sex on risk stratification with 
stress myocardial perfusion Rb-82 positron emission tomography: results 
from the PET (positron emission tomography) prognosis multicenter regis-
try. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2013;62:1866–1876.
 39. Schenker MP, Dorbala S, Hong EC, et al. Interrelation of coronary calci-
fication, myocardial ischemia, and outcomes in patients with intermediate 
likelihood of coronary artery disease: a combined positron emission tomog-
raphy/computed tomography study. Circulation. 2008;117:1693–1700.
 40. Motoyama S, Ito H, Sarai M, et al. Plaque characterization by coronary com-
puted tomography angiography and the likelihood of acute coronary events 
in mid-term follow-up. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2015;66:337–346.
 41. Ferencik M, Mayrhofer T, Bittner DO, et al. Use of high-risk coronary athero-
sclerotic plaque detection for risk stratification of patients with stable chest 
pain: a secondary analysis of the PROMISE randomized clinical trial. JAMA 
Cardiol. 2018;3:144–152.
 42. Williams MC, Kwiecinski J, Doris M, et al. Low-attenuation noncalcified 
plaque on coronary computed tomography angiography predicts myocardial 
infarction: results from the multicenter SCOT-HEART trial (Scottish Com-
puted Tomography of the HEART). Circulation. 2020;141:1452–1462.
 43. Bingham SE, Hachamovitch R. Incremental prognostic significance of com-
bined cardiac magnetic resonance imaging, adenosine stress perfusion, 
delayed enhancement, and left ventricular function over preimaging infor-
mation for the prediction of adverse events. Circulation. 2011;123:1509–
1518.
 44. Indorkar R, Kwong RY, Romano S, et al. Global coronary flow reserve mea-
sured during stress cardiac magnetic resonance imaging is an indepen-
dent predictor of adverse cardiovascular events. J Am Coll Cardiol Img. 
2019;12:1686–1695.
 45. Douglas PS, Hoffmann U, Patel MR, et al. Outcomes of anatomi-
cal versus functional testing for coronary artery disease. N Engl J Med. 
2015;372:1291–1300.
 46. Hoffmann U, Ferencik M, Udelson JE, et al. Prognostic value of noninvasive 
cardiovascular testing in patients with stable chest pain: insights from the 
PROMISE trial (Prospective Multicenter Imaging Study for Evaluation of 
Chest Pain). Circulation. 2017;135:2320–2332.
 47 . Fihn SD, Gardin JM, Abrams J, et al. 2012 ACCF/AHA/ACP/AATS/
PCNA/SCAI/STS guideline for the diagnosis and management of patients 
with stable ischemic heart disease: a report of the American College of 
Cardiology Foundation/American Heart Association Task Force on Practice 
Guidelines, and the American College of Physicians, American Association 
for Thoracic Surgery, Preventive Cardiovascular Nurses Association, Society 
for Cardiovascular Angiography and Interventions, and Society of Thoracic 
Surgeons. Circulation. 2022;145:e18–e114.
 48. Fihn SD, Blankenship JC, Alexander KP, et al. 2014 ACC/AHA/AATS/PCNA/
SCAI/STS focused update of the guideline for the diagnosis and management 
of patients with stable ischemic heart disease: a report of the American College 
of Cardiology/American Heart Association Task Force on Practice Guidelines, 
and the American Association for Thoracic Surgery, Preventive Cardiovascular 
Nurses Association, Society for Cardiovascular Angiography and Interventions, 
and Society of Thoracic Surgeons. Circulation. 2014;130:1749–1767 .
 49. Califf RM, Armstrong PW, Carver JR, et al. Task force 5. Stratification of pa-
tients into high, medium and low risk subgroups for purposes of risk factor 
management. J Am Coll Cardiol. 1996;27:1007–1019.
 50. Mark DB, Shaw L, Harrell FE Jr., et al. Prognostic value of a treadmill exer-
cise score in outpatients with suspected coronary artery disease. N Engl J 
Med. 1991;325:849–853.
 51. Perera D, Clayton T, O'Kane PD, et al. Percutaneous revascularization for 
ischemic left ventricular dysfunction. N Engl J Med. 2022;387:1351–1360.
 52. Andreini D, Pontone G, Pepi M, et al. Diagnostic accuracy of multidetector 
computed tomography coronary angiography in patients with dilated cardio-
myopathy. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2007;49:2044–2050.
4.1. General Approach to Treatment Decisions
 1. Boden WE, O'Rourke RA, Teo KK, et al. Optimal medical therapy with or with-
out PCI for stable coronary disease. N Engl J Med. 2007;356:1503–1516.
 2. Weintraub WS, Spertus JA, Kolm P, et al. Effect of PCI on quality of life in 
patients with stable coronary disease. N Engl J Med. 2008;359:677–687 .
 3. Maron DJ, Hochman JS, Reynolds HR, et al. Initial invasive or conservative 
strategy for stable coronary disease. N Engl J Med. 2020;382:1395–1407 .
 4. Bangalore S, Steg G, Deedwania P, et al. Beta-blocker use and clinical out-
comes in stable outpatients with and without coronary artery disease. JAMA. 
2012;308:1340–1349. 5. Poole-Wilson PA, Lubsen J, Kirwan BA, et al. Effect of long-acting nife-
dipine on mortality and cardiovascular morbidity in patients with stable an-
gina requiring treatment (ACTION trial): randomised controlled trial. Lancet. 
2004;364:849–857 .
 6. Wilson SR, Scirica BM, Braunwald E, et al. Efficacy of ranolazine in pa-
tients with chronic angina observations from the randomized, double-blind, 
placebo-controlled MERLIN-TIMI (Metabolic Efficiency With Ranolazine for 
Less Ischemia in Non-ST-Segment Elevation Acute Coronary Syndromes) 
36 Trial. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2009;53:1510–1516.
 7 . Ferrari R, Pavasini R, Camici PG, et al. Anti-anginal drugs-beliefs and evi-
dence: systematic review covering 50 years of medical treatment. Eur Heart 
J. 2019;40:190–194.
 8. Arnold SV, Jang JS, Tang F, et al. Prediction of residual angina after per-
cutaneous coronary intervention. Eur Heart J Qual Care Clin Outcomes. 
2015;1:23–30.
 9. Zhang Z, Jones P, Weintraub WS, et al. Predicting the benefits of percuta-
neous coronary intervention on 1-year angina and quality of life in stable 
ischemic heart disease: risk models from the COURAGE trial (Clinical Out-
comes Utilizing Revascularization and Aggressive Drug Evaluation). Circ 
Cardiovasc Qual Outcomes. 2018;11:e003971.
 10. Longmore RB, Spertus JA, Alexander KP, et al. Angina frequency after 
myocardial infarction and quality of life in older versus younger adults: the 
Prospective Registry Evaluating Myocardial Infarction: Event and Recovery 
study. Am Heart J. 2011;161:631–638.
 11. Ruo B, Rumsfeld JS, Hlatky MA, et al. Depressive symptoms and health-
related quality of life: the Heart and Soul Study. JAMA. 2003;290:215–221.
 12. Spertus JA, Jones PG, Maron DJ, et al. Health-status outcomes with invasive 
or conservative care in coronary disease. N Engl J Med. 2020;382:1408–
1419.
 13. McAlister FA, Majumdar SR, Lin M, et al. Cholesterol end points predict out-
come in patients with coronary disease: quality improvement metrics from 
the enhancing secondary prevention in coronary artery disease (ESP-CAD) 
trial. Can J Cardiol. 2014;30:1627–1632.
 14. Waldeyer C, Seiffert M, Staebe N, et al. Lipid management after first diagno-
sis of coronary artery disease: contemporary results from an observational 
cohort study. Clin Ther. 2017;39:2311–2320.e2.
 15. Rana JS, Virani SS, Moffet HH, et al. Association of low-density lipoprotein 
testing after an atherosclerotic cardiovascular event with subsequent statin 
adherence and intensification. Am J Med. 2022;135:603–606.
 16. Garcia BH, Giverhaug T, Hoegli JU, et al. A pharmacist-led follow-up pro-
gram for patients with established coronary heart disease in North Norway: 
a randomized controlled trial. Pharm Pract (Granada). 2015;13:575.
 17 . Gyberg V, De Bacquer D, De Backer G, et al. Patients with coronary ar-
tery disease and diabetes need improved management: a report from the 
EUROASPIRE IV survey: a registry from the EuroObservational Research 
Programme of the European Society of Cardiology. Cardiovasc Diabetol. 
2015;14:133.
 18. Pocock S, Brieger DB, Owen R, et al. Health-related quality of life 1-3 
years post-myocardial infarction: its impact on prognosis. Open Heart. 
2021;8:e001499.
 19. Shafiq A, Arnold SV, Gosch K, et al. Patient and physician discordance in re-
porting symptoms of angina among stable coronary artery disease patients: 
insights from the Angina Prevalence and Provider Evaluation of Angina Re-
lief (APPEAR) study. Am Heart J. 2016;175:94–100.
 20. Beltrame JF, Weekes AJ, Morgan C, et al. The prevalence of weekly angina 
among patients with chronic stable angina in primary care practices. Arch 
Intern Med. 2009;169:1491–1499.
 21. Saxon JT, Chan PS, Tran AT, et al. Comparison of patient-reported vs physi-
cian-estimated angina in patients undergoing elective and urgent percuta-
neous coronary intervention. JAMA Netw Open. 2020;3:e207406.
 22. Qintar M, Spertus JA, Gosch KL, et al. Effect of angina under-recognition 
on treatment in outpatients with stable ischaemic heart disease. Eur Heart J 
Qual Care Clin Outcomes. 2016;2:208–214.
 23. Arnold SV, Grodzinsky A, Gosch KL, et al. Predictors of physician under-
recognition of angina in outpatients with stable coronary artery disease. Circ 
Cardiovasc Qual Outcomes. 2016;9:554–559.
 24. Bayati T, Dehghan A, Bonyadi F, et al. Investigating the effect of education 
on health literacy and its relation to health-promoting behaviors in health 
center. J Educ Health Promot. 2018;7:127 .
 25. van der Heide I, Wang J, Droomers M, et al. The relationship between health, 
education, and health literacy: results from the Dutch Adult Literacy and Life 
Skills Survey. J Health Commun. 2013;18(suppl 1):172–184.
 26. Thompson D, Al-Lamee R, Foley M, et al. Achieving optimal adherence to 
medical therapy by telehealth: findings from the ORBITA medication adher-
ence sub-study. Pharmacol Res Perspect. 2021;9:e00710.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on November 12, 2025

CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINESAugust 29, 2023 Circulation. 2023;148:e9–e119. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000001168
Virani et al 2023 AHA/ACC/ACCP/ASPC/NLA/PCNA Chronic Coronary Disease Guideline e88 27 . Scirica BM, Cannon CP, Fisher NDL, et al. Digital care transformation: inter-
im report from the first 5000 patients enrolled in a remote algorithm-based 
cardiovascular risk management program to improve lipid and hypertension 
control. Circulation. 2021;143:507–509.
 28. Peric VM, Borzanovic MD, Stolic RV, et al. Severity of angina as a predictor 
of quality of life changes six months after coronary artery bypass surgery. 
Ann Thorac Surg. 2006;81:2115–2120.
 29. Rumsfeld JS, Magid DJ, O'Brien M, et al. Changes in health-related qual-
ity of life following coronary artery bypass graft surgery. Ann Thorac Surg. 
2001;72:2026–2032.
 30. Rumsfeld JS, Magid DJ, Plomondon ME, et al. Predictors of quality of life 
following acute coronary syndromes. Am J Cardiol. 2001;88:781–784.
 31. Chan PS, Jones PG, Arnold SA, et al. Development and validation of a short 
version of the Seattle angina questionnaire. Circ Cardiovasc Qual Outcomes. 
2014;7:640–647 .
4.1.1. Team-Based Approach
 1. Chisholm-Burns MA, Kim Lee J, Spivey CA, et al. US pharmacists' effect as 
team members on patient care: systematic review and meta-analyses. Med 
Care. 2010;48:923–933.
 2. Fazel MT, Bagalagel A, Lee JK, et al. Impact of diabetes care by pharmacists 
as part of health care team in ambulatory settings: a systematic review and 
meta-analysis. Ann Pharmacother. 2017;51:890–907 .
 3. Mills KT, Obst KM, Shen W, et al. Comparative effectiveness of implementa-
tion strategies for blood pressure control in hypertensive patients: a system-
atic review and meta-analysis. Ann Intern Med. 2018;168:110–120.
 4. Proia KK, Thota AB, Njie GJ, et al. Team-based care and improved blood 
pressure control: a community guide systematic review. Am J Prev Med. 
2014;47:86–99.
 5. Wan EYF, Fung CSC, Jiao FF, et al. Five-year effectiveness of the multidis-
ciplinary risk assessment and management programme-diabetes mellitus 
(RAMP-DM) on diabetes-related complications and health service uses: 
a population-based and propensity-matched cohort study. Diabetes Care. 
2018;41:49–59.
 6. Chen S-M, Fang Y-N, Wang L-Y, et al. Impact of multi-disciplinary treat-
ment strategy on systolic heart failure outcome. BMC Cardiovasc Disord. 
2019;19:1–7 .
 7 . Jiao F, Fung CS, Wan YF, et al. Long-term effects of the multidisciplinary 
risk assessment and management program for patients with diabetes mel-
litus (RAMP-DM): a population-based cohort study. Cardiovasc Diabetol. 
2015;14:105.
 8. Snaterse M, Dobber J, Jepma P, et al. Effective components of nurse-coor-
dinated care to prevent recurrent coronary events: a systematic review and 
meta-analysis. Heart. 2016;102:50–56.
 9. Virani SS, Akeroyd JM, Ramsey DJ, et al. Health care resource utilization 
for outpatient cardiovascular disease and diabetes care delivery among ad-
vanced practice providers and physician providers in primary care. Popul 
Health Manag. 2018;21:209–216.
 10. Rajan SS, Akeroyd JM, Ahmed ST, et al. Health care costs associated with 
primary care physicians versus nurse practitioners and physician assistants. 
J Am Assoc Nurse Pract. 2021;33:967–974.
 11. Carter BL, Levy B, Gryzlak B, et al. Cluster-randomized trial to evaluate a 
centralized clinical pharmacy service in private family medicine offices. Circ 
Cardiovasc Qual Outcomes. 2018;11:e004188.
 12. Tapsell LC, Neale EP. The effect of interdisciplinary interventions on risk 
factors for lifestyle disease. Health Educ Behav. 2016;43:271–285.
 13. Carter BL, Rogers M, Daly J, et al. The potency of team-based care interven-
tions for hypertension: a meta-analysis. Arch Intern Med. 2009;169:1748–
1755.
 14. Arnett DK, Blumenthal RS, Albert MA, et al. 2019 ACC/AHA guideline on 
the primary prevention of cardiovascular disease: a report of the American 
College of Cardiology/American Heart Association Task Force on Clinical 
Practice Guidelines. Circulation. 2019;140:e596–e646.
 15. Buhse S, Muhlhauser I, Heller T, et al. Informed shared decision-making 
programme on the prevention of myocardial infarction in type 2 diabetes: a 
randomised controlled trial. BMJ Open. 2015;5:e009116.
 16. Chen EH, Thom DH, Hessler DM, et al. Using the Teamlet Model to im-
prove chronic care in an academic primary care practice. J Gen Intern Med. 
2010;25(suppl 4):S610–S614.
 17 . Chen Z, Ernst ME, Ardery G, et al. Physician-pharmacist co-manage-
ment and 24-hour blood pressure control. J Clin Hypertens (Greenwich). 
2013;15:337–343.
 18. Cooper LA, Roter DL, Carson KA, et al. A randomized trial to improve pa-
tient-centered care and hypertension control in underserved primary care 
patients. J Gen Intern Med. 2011;26:1297–1304. 19. Fentanes E, Vande Hei AG, Holuby RS, et al. Treatment in a preventive cardiology 
clinic utilizing advanced practice providers effectively closes atherosclerotic 
cardiovascular disease risk-management gaps among a primary-prevention 
population compared with a propensity-matched primary-care cohort: a team-
based care model and its impact on lipid and blood pressure management. Clin 
Cardiol. 2018;41:817–824.
 20. Hirsch JD, Steers N, Adler DS, et al. Primary care-based, pharmacist-physi-
cian collaborative medication-therapy management of hypertension: a ran-
domized, pragmatic trial. Clin Ther. 2014;36:1244–1254.
 21. Hunt JS, Siemienczuk J, Pape G, et al. A randomized controlled trial of team-
based care: impact of physician-pharmacist collaboration on uncontrolled 
hypertension. J Gen Intern Med. 2008;23:1966–1972.
 22. Isetts BJ, Buffington DE, Carter BL, et al. Evaluation of pharmacists' work in 
a physician-pharmacist collaborative model for the management of hyper-
tension. Pharmacotherapy. 2016;36:374–384.
 23. Kravetz JD, Walsh RF. Team-based hypertension management to improve 
blood pressure control. J Prim Care Community Health. 2016;7:272–275.
 24. McLean DL, McAlister FA, Johnson JA, et al. A randomized trial of the ef-
fect of community pharmacist and nurse care on improving blood pressure 
management in patients with diabetes mellitus: study of cardiovascular risk 
intervention by pharmacists-hypertension (SCRIP-HTN). Arch Intern Med. 
2008;168:2355–2361.
 25. Olomu A, Hart-Davidson W, Luo Z, et al. Implementing shared decision mak-
ing in federally qualified health centers, a quasi-experimental design study: 
the Office-Guidelines Applied to Practice (Office-GAP) program. BMC 
Health Serv Res. 2016;16:334.
 26. Parchman ML, Zeber JE, Palmer RF. Participatory decision making, patient 
activation, medication adherence, and intermediate clinical outcomes in type 
2 diabetes: a STARNet study. Ann Fam Med. 2010;8:410–417 .
 27 . Polgreen LA, Han J, Carter BL, et al. Cost-effectiveness of a physician-
pharmacist collaboration intervention to improve blood pressure control. 
Hypertension. 2015;66:1145–1151.
 28. Fors A, Ekman I, Taft C, et al. Person-centred care after acute coronary 
syndrome, from hospital to primary care-a randomised controlled trial. Int J 
Cardiol. 2015;187:693–699.
 29. Jiao FF, Fung CS, Wong CK, et al. Effects of the Multidisciplinary Risk As-
sessment and Management Program for Patients with Diabetes Mellitus 
(RAMP-DM) on biomedical outcomes, observed cardiovascular events and 
cardiovascular risks in primary care: a longitudinal comparative study. Car-
diovasc Diabetol. 2014;13:127 .
 30. Smith SM, Carris NW, Dietrich E, et al. Physician-pharmacist collaboration 
versus usual care for treatment-resistant hypertension. J Am Soc Hypertens. 
2016;10:307–317 .
 31. Camacho EM, Davies LM, Hann M, et al. Long-term clinical and cost-
effectiveness of collaborative care (versus usual care) for people with 
mental-physical multimorbidity: cluster-randomised trial. Br J Psychiatry. 
2018;213:456–463.
 32. Jiang W, Zhang Y, Yan F, et al. Effectiveness of a nurse-led multidisciplinary 
self-management program for patients with coronary heart disease in com-
munities: a randomized controlled trial. Patient Educ Couns. 2020;103:854–
863.
 33. Lin EH, Von Korff M, Ciechanowski P, et al. Treatment adjustment 
and medication adherence for complex patients with diabetes, heart 
disease, and depression: a randomized controlled trial. Ann Fam Med. 
2012;10:6–14.
 34. Maru S, Byrnes J, Carrington MJ, et al. Economic evaluation of a nurse-led 
home and clinic-based secondary prevention programme to prevent pro-
gressive cardiac dysfunction in high-risk individuals: The Nurse-led Inter-
vention for Less Chronic Heart Failure (NIL-CHF) randomized controlled 
study. Eur J Cardiovasc Nurs. 2018;17:439–445.
 35. Virani SS, Maddox TM, Chan PS, et al. Provider T ype and Quality of Outpa-
tient Cardiovascular Disease Care: Insights From the NCDR PINNACLE 
Registry. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2015;66:1803–1812.
 36. Brush JE Jr, Handberg EM, Biga C, et al. 2015 ACC health policy state-
ment on cardiovascular team-based care and the role of advanced practice 
providers. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2015;65:2118–2136.
4.1.2. Patient Education
 1. Ghisi GL, Abdallah F, Grace SL, et al. A systematic review of patient educa-
tion in cardiac patients: do they increase knowledge and promote health 
behavior change?. Patient Educ Couns. 2014;95:160–174.
 2. Elnaem MH, Rosley NFF, Alhifany AA, et al. Impact of pharmacist-led inter-
ventions on medication adherence and clinical outcomes in patients with 
hypertension and hyperlipidemia: a scoping review of published literature. J 
Multidiscip Healthc. 2020;13:635–645.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on November 12, 2025

CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINESCirculation. 2023;148:e9–e119. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000001168 August 29, 2023
Virani et al 2023 AHA/ACC/ACCP/ASPC/NLA/PCNA Chronic Coronary Disease Guideline e89 3. Ostbring MJ, Eriksson T, Petersson G, et al. Effects of a pharmaceutical care 
intervention on clinical outcomes and patient adherence in coronary heart 
disease: the MIMeRiC randomized controlled trial. BMC Cardiovasc Disord. 
2021;21:367 .
 4. Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality. Medication Adherence In-
terventions: Closing the Quality Gap: Revisiting the State of the Science: 
Executive Summary. AHRQ; 2012. AHRQ Pub. No. 12-E010-1. Published 
online September 2012. Accessed November 27 , 2021. https://effective-
healthcare.ahrq.gov/sites/default/files/related_files/medication-adher-
ence-interventions_executive.pdf.
 5. Anderson L, Brown JP, Clark AM, et al. Patient education in the management 
of coronary heart disease. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2017;6:CD008895.
 6. Clark AM, Hartling L, Vandermeer B, et al. Meta-analysis: secondary preven-
tion programs for patients with coronary artery disease. Ann Intern Med. 
2005;143:659–672.
 7 . Wallert J, Olsson EM, Pingel R, et al. Attending Heart School and long-term 
outcome after myocardial infarction: a decennial SWEDEHEART registry 
study. Eur J Prev Cardiol. 2020;27:145–154.
 8. Palacios J, Lee GA, Duaso M, et al. Internet-delivered self-management 
support for improving coronary heart disease and self-management-related 
outcomes: a systematic review. J Cardiovasc Nurs. 2017;32:e9–e23.
 9. Institute of Medicine. Health Literacy: A Prescription to End Confusion. The 
National Academies Press; 2004
 10. Brega AG, Barnard J, Mabachi NM, et al. AHRQ Health Literacy Universal 
Precautions Toolkit. 2nd ed. AHRQ; 2015. AHRQ Pub. No. 15-0023-EF. 
Accessed December 15, 2021. https://www.ahrq.gov/sites/default/files/
publications/files/healthlittoolkit2_3.pdf.
 11. Smith DH, Kramer JM, Perrin N, et al. A randomized trial of direct-to-patient com-
munication to enhance adherence to beta-blocker therapy following myocardial 
infarction. Arch Intern Med. 2008;168:477–483; discussion 483; quiz 447 .
 12. Wilhelmsen NC, Eriksson T. Medication adherence interventions and out-
comes: an overview of systematic reviews. Eur J Hosp Pharm. 2019;26:187–
192.
4.1.3. Shared Decision-Making
 1. Provance JB, Spertus JA, Decker C, et al. Assessing patient preferences for 
shared decision-making in peripheral artery disease. Circ Cardiovasc Qual 
Outcomes. 2019;12:e005730.
 2. Jansen J, McKinn S, Bonner C, et al. Shared decision-making about cardio-
vascular disease medication in older people: a qualitative study of patient 
experiences in general practice. BMJ Open. 2019;9:e026342.
 3. Deber RB, Kraetschmer N, Irvine J. What role do patients wish to play in 
treatment decision making?. Arch Intern Med. 1996;156:1414–1420.
 4. Coylewright M, Dick S, Zmolek B, et al. PCI choice decision aid for stable 
coronary artery disease: a randomized trial. Circ Cardiovasc Qual Outcomes. 
2016;9:767–776.
 5. Krumholz HM, Barreto-Filho JA, Jones PG, et al. Decision-making prefer-
ences among patients with an acute myocardial infarction. JAMA Intern Med. 
2013;173:1252–1257 .
 6. Stacey D, Legare F, Lewis K, et al. Decision aids for people facing 
health treatment or screening decisions. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 
2017;4:CD001431.
 7 . Scalia P, Saunders CH, Dannenberg M, et al. Processes for evidence sum-
marization for patient decision aids: a Delphi consensus study. Health Ex-
pect. 2021;24:1178–1186.
 8. Witteman HO, Maki KG, Vaisson G, et al. Systematic development of patient 
decision aids: an update from the IPDAS collaboration. Med Decis Making. 
2021;41:736–754.
 9. Bonner C, Trevena LJ, Gaissmaier W, et al. Current best practice for pre-
senting probabilities in patient decision aids: fundamental principles. Med 
Decis Making. 2021;41:821–833.
4.1.4. Social Determinants of Health
 1. Jilani MH, Javed Z, Yahya T, et al. Social determinants of health and car-
diovascular disease: current state and future directions towards healthcare 
equity. Curr Atheroscler Rep. 2021;23:55.
 2. Schultz WM, Kelli HM, Lisko JC, et al. Socioeconomic status and cardiovas-
cular outcomes: challenges and interventions. Circulation. 2018;137:2166–
2178.
 3. Lindley KJ, Aggarwal NR, Briller JE, et al. Socioeconomic determinants of 
health and cardiovascular outcomes in women: JACC review topic of the 
week. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2021;78:1919–1929.
 4. Moen M, Storr C, German D, et al. A review of tools to screen for social 
determinants of health in the United States: a practice brief. Popul Health 
Manag. 2020;23:422–429. 5. Berkman LF, Blumenthal J, Burg M, et al. Effects of treating depression and 
low perceived social support on clinical events after myocardial infarction: 
the Enhancing Recovery in Coronary Heart Disease Patients (ENRICHD) 
Randomized Trial. JAMA. 2003;289:3106–3116.
 6. Kawachi I, Colditz GA, Ascherio A, et al. A prospective study of social net-
works in relation to total mortality and cardiovascular disease in men in the 
USA. J Epidemiol Community Health. 1996;50:245–251.
 7 . Fiscella K, Tancredi D, Franks P. Adding socioeconomic status to Framing-
ham scoring to reduce disparities in coronary risk assessment. Am Heart J. 
2009;157:988–994.
 8. Brindle PM, McConnachie A, Upton MN, et al. The accuracy of the Framing-
ham risk-score in different socioeconomic groups: a prospective study. Br J 
Gen Pract. 2005;55:838–845.
 9. Arnett DK, Blumenthal RS, Albert MA, et al. 2019 ACC/AHA guideline on 
the primary prevention of cardiovascular disease: a report of the American 
College of Cardiology/American Heart Association Task Force on Clinical 
Practice Guidelines. Circulation. 2019;140:e596–e646.
 10. Havranek EP, Mujahid MS, Barr DA, et al. Social determinants of risk and 
outcomes for cardiovascular disease: a scientific statement from the Ameri-
can Heart Association. Circulation. 2015;132:873–898.
 11. World Health Organization. Closing the gap in a generation: health equity 
through action on the social determinants of health 2008. Accessed De-
cember 20, 2021. https://www.who.int/social_determinants/thecommis-
sion/finalreport/en/.
 12. Mital R, Bayne J, Rodriguez F, et al. Race and ethnicity considerations in 
patients with coronary artery disease and stroke: JACC focus seminar 3/9. 
J Am Coll Cardiol. 2021;78:2483–2492.
 13. Hammond G, Joynt-Maddox KE. A theoretical framework for clinical imple-
mentation of social determinants of health. JAMA Cardiol. 2019;4:1189–
1190.
 14. Roger VL. Medicine and society: social determinants of health and cardio-
vascular disease. Eur Heart J. 2020;41:1179–1181.
 15. Lloyd-Jones DM, Elkind M, Albert MA. American Heart Association's 2024 
impact goal: every person deserves the opportunity for a full, healthy life. 
Circulation. 2021;144:e277–e279.
 16. Butkus R, Rapp K, Cooney TG, et al. Envisioning a better U.S. health care 
system for all: reducing barriers to care and addressing social determinants 
of health. Ann Intern Med. 2020;172:S50–S59.
 17 . Arons A, DeSilvey S, Fichtenberg C, et al. Documenting social determinants 
of health-related clinical activities using standardized medical vocabularies. 
JAMA Open. 2019;2:81–88.
 18. Angell SY, McConnell MV, Anderson CAM, et al. The American Heart Asso-
ciation 2030 impact goal: a presidential advisory from the American Heart 
Association. Circulation. 2020;141:e120–e138.
 19. Itchhaporia D. Paving the way for health equity in cardiology: why does it 
matter?. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2021;77:2613–2616.
 20. Caceres BA, Streed CG Jr, Corliss HL, et al. Assessing and addressing car-
diovascular health in LGBTQ adults: a scientific statement from the Ameri-
can Heart Association. Circulation. 2020;142:e321–e332.
 21. Streed CG Jr, Beach LB, Caceres BA, et al. Assessing and addressing 
cardiovascular health in people who are transgender and gender diverse: 
a scientific statement from the American Heart Association. Circulation. 
2021;144:e136–e148.
 22. Billioux A, Verlander K, Anthony S, et al. Standardized screening for health-
related social needs in clinical settings: the Accountable Health Communities 
Screening Tool. NAM Perspectives Discussion Paper, National Academy of 
Medicine. Washington, DC; 2017 .
 23. Tong ST, Liaw WR, Kashiri PL, et al. Clinician experiences with screening for 
social needs in primary care. J Am Board Fam Med. 2018;31:351–363.
 24. Palacio A, Mansi R, Seo D, et al. Social determinants of health score: does 
it help identify those at higher cardiovascular risk?. Am J Manag Care. 
2020;26:e312–e318.
 25. Magnani JW, Mujahid MS, Aronow HD, et al. Health literacy and cardio-
vascular disease: fundamental relevance to primary and secondary preven-
tion: a scientific statement from the American Heart Association. Circulation. 
2018;138:e48–e74.
 26. Brush JE Jr, Handberg EM, Biga C, et al. 2015 ACC health policy state-
ment on cardiovascular team-based care and the role of advanced practice 
providers. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2015;65:2118–2136.
 27 . Gaziano T, Abrahams-Gessel S, Surka S, et al. Cardiovascular disease 
screening by community health workers can be cost-effective in low-re-
source countries. Health Aff (Millwood). 2015;34:1538–1545.
 28. Lapidos A, Lapedis J, Heisler M. Realizing the value of community health 
workers: new opportunities for sustainable financing. N Engl J Med. 
2019;380:1990–1992.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on November 12, 2025

CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINESAugust 29, 2023 Circulation. 2023;148:e9–e119. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000001168
Virani et al 2023 AHA/ACC/ACCP/ASPC/NLA/PCNA Chronic Coronary Disease Guideline e90 29. Freij M, Dullabh P, Lewis S, et al. Incorporating social determinants of health 
in electronic health records: qualitative study of current practices among top 
vendors. JMIR Med Inform. 2019;7:e13849.
 30. Magnan S. Social determinants of health 201 for health care: plan, do, study, 
act. NAM Perspect. 2021;2021:1. doi: 0.31478/202106c
 31. Meyer D, Lerner E, Phillips A, et al. Universal screening of social determi-
nants of health at a large US academic medical center. Am J Public Health. 
2020;110:S219–S221.
 32. Adler NE, Stead WW. Patients in context: EHR capture of social and behav-
ioral determinants of health. N Engl J Med. 2015;372:698–701.
 33. Gajardo AI, Henriquez F, Llancaqueo M. Big data, social determinants of 
coronary heart disease and barriers for data access. Eur J Prev Cardiol. 
2020;2047487320922366.
 34. Berman AN, Biery DW, Ginder C, et al. Association of socioeconomic dis-
advantage with long-term mortality after myocardial infarction: the Mass 
General Brigham YOUNG-MI Registry. JAMA Cardiol. 2021;6:880–888.
 35. Shaw LJ, Merz CN, Bittner V, et al. Importance of socioeconomic status as 
a predictor of cardiovascular outcome and costs of care in women with sus-
pected myocardial ischemia. Results from the National Institutes of Health, 
National Heart, Lung and Blood Institute-sponsored Women's Ischemia Syn-
drome Evaluation (WISE). J Womens Health (Larchmt). 2008;17:1081–1092.
 36. Kelli HM, Mehta A, Tahhan AS, et al. Low educational attainment is a predic-
tor of adverse outcomes in patients with coronary artery disease. J Am Heart 
Assoc. 2019;8:e013165.
 37 . Wadhera RK, Bhatt DL, Kind AJH, et al. Association of outpatient practice-
level socioeconomic disadvantage with quality of care and outcomes among 
older adults with coronary artery disease: implications for value-based pay-
ment. Circ Cardiovasc Qual Outcomes. 2020;13:e005977 .
 38. Mehta RH, O'Shea JC, Stebbins AL, et al. Association of mortality with years 
of education in patients with ST-segment elevation myocardial infarction 
treated with fibrinolysis. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2011;57:138–146.
 39. Gerber Y, Goldbourt U, Drory Y. Interaction between income and education 
in predicting long-term survival after acute myocardial infarction. Eur J Car-
diovasc Prev Rehabil. 2008;15:526–532.
 40. Mathews L, Brewer LC. A review of disparities in cardiac rehabilitation: evi-
dence, drivers and solutions. J Cardiopulm Rehabil Prev. 2021;41:375–382.
 41. Lemstra ME, Alsabbagh W, Rajakumar RJ, et al. Neighbourhood income 
and cardiac rehabilitation access as determinants of nonattendance and 
noncompletion. Can J Cardiol. 2013;29:1599–1603.
 42. Udell JA, Desai NR, Li S, et al. Neighborhood socioeconomic disadvantage 
and care after myocardial infarction in the National Cardiovascular Data 
Registry. Circ Cardiovasc Qual Outcomes. 2018;11:e004054.
 43. South EC, Hohl BC, Kondo MC, et al. Effect of greening vacant land on 
mental health of community-dwelling adults: a cluster randomized trial. 
JAMA Netw Open. 2018;1:e180298.
 44. Dubowitz T, Zenk SN, Ghosh-Dastidar B, et al. Healthy food access for ur-
ban food desert residents: examination of the food environment, food pur-
chasing practices, diet and BMI. Public Health Nutr. 2015;18:2220–2230.
 45. Creatore MI, Glazier RH, Moineddin R, et al. Association of neighbor-
hood walkability with change in overweight, obesity, and diabetes. JAMA. 
2016;315:2211–2220.
 46. Powell-Wiley TM, Moore K, Allen N, et al. Associations of neighborhood 
crime and safety and with changes in body mass index and waist cir-
cumference: the Multi-Ethnic Study of Atherosclerosis. Am J Epidemiol. 
2017;186:280–288.
 47 . Remigio-Baker RA, Diez Roux AV, Szklo M, et al. Physical environment may 
modify the association between depressive symptoms and change in waist 
circumference: the multi-ethnic study of atherosclerosis. Psychosomatics. 
2014;55:144–154.
 48. Rutledge T, Reis SE, Olson M, et al. Social networks are associated with 
lower mortality rates among women with suspected coronary disease: the 
National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute-Sponsored Women's Ischemia 
Syndrome Evaluation study. Psychosom Med. 2004;66:882–888.
 49. Brewer LC, Fortuna KL, Jones C, et al. Back to the future: achieving health 
equity through health informatics and digital health. JMIR Mhealth Uhealth. 
2020;8:e14512.
 50. Shah LM, Ding J, Spaulding EM, et al. Sociodemographic characteristics 
predicting digital health intervention use after acute myocardial infarction. J 
Cardiovasc Transl Res. 2021;14:951–961.
 51. Bhardwaj V, Spaulding EM, Marvel FA, et al. Cost-effectiveness of a digi-
tal health intervention for acute myocardial infarction recovery. Med Care. 
2021;59:1023–1030.
 52. O'Brien KH. Social determinants of health: the how, who, and where 
screenings are occurring; a systematic review. Soc Work Health Care. 
2019;58:719–745. 53. Samuels-Kalow ME, Boggs KM, Cash RE, et al. Screening for health-
related social needs of emergency department patients. Ann Emerg Med. 
2021;77:62–68.
 54. Kangovi S, Mitra N, Norton L, et al. Effect of community health work-
er support on clinical outcomes of low-income patients across pri-
mary care facilities: a randomized clinical trial. JAMA Internal Medicine. 
2018;178:1635–1643.
 55. American Hospital Association. A Playbook for Fostering Hospital-commu-
nity Partnerships to Build a Culture of Health. 2017 . Accessed June 30, 
2021. https://www.aha.org/system/files/hpoe/Reports-HPOE/2017/A-
playbook-forfostering-hospitalcommunity-partnerships.pdf.
4.2.1. Nutrition, Including Supplements
 1. Rees K, Takeda A, Martin N, et al. Mediterranean-style diet for the primary 
and secondary prevention of cardiovascular disease. Cochrane Database 
Sys Review. 2019;3:CD009825.
 2. de Lorgeril M, Salen P, Martin JL, et al. Mediterranean diet, traditional risk 
factors, and the rate of cardiovascular complications after myocardial infarc-
tion: final report of the Lyon Diet Heart Study. Circulation. 1999;99:779–
785.
 3. Li S, Chiuve SE, Flint A, et al. Better diet quality and decreased mortality 
among myocardial infarction survivors. JAMA Intern Med. 2013;173:1808–
1818.
 4. Sawicki CM, Jacques PF, Lichtenstein AH, et al. Whole- and refined-grain 
consumption and longitudinal changes in cardiometabolic risk factors in the 
Framingham offspring cohort. J Nutr. 2021;151:2790–2799.
 5. Threapleton DE, Greenwood DC, Evans CEL, et al. Dietary fibre intake and 
risk of cardiovascular disease: systematic review and meta-analysis. BMJ. 
2013;347:f6879.
 6. Hooper L, Martin N, Jimoh OF, et al. Reduction in saturated fat intake for 
cardiovascular disease. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2020;5:CD011737 .
 7 . O'Donnell MJ, Yusuf S, Mente A, et al. Urinary sodium and potassium excre-
tion and risk of cardiovascular events. JAMA. 2011;306:2229–2238.
 8. Sacks FM, Svetkey LP, Vollmer WM, et al. Effects on blood pressure of 
reduced dietary sodium and the Dietary Approaches to Stop Hypertension 
(DASH) diet. DASH-Sodium Collaborative Research Group. N Engl J Med. 
2001;344:3–10.
 9. Guasch-Ferre M, Babio N, Martinez-Gonzalez MA, et al. Dietary fat intake 
and risk of cardiovascular disease and all-cause mortality in a population at 
high risk of cardiovascular disease. Am J Clin Nutr. 2015;102:1563–1573.
 10. Kiage JN, Merrill PD, Robinson CJ, et al. Intake of trans fat and all-cause 
mortality in the Reasons for Geographical and Racial Differences in Stroke 
(REGARDS) cohort. Am J Clin Nutr. 2013;97:1121–1128.
 11. Abdelhamid AS, Brown T J, Brainard JS, et al. Omega-3 fatty acids for the 
primary and secondary prevention of cardiovascular disease. Cochrane Da-
tabase Syst Rev. 2020;3:CD003177 .
 12. Schwingshackl L, Boeing H, Stelmach-Mardas M, et al. Dietary supplements 
and risk of cause-specific death, cardiovascular disease, and cancer: a 
systematic review and meta-analysis of primary prevention trials. Adv Nutr. 
2017;8:27–39.
 13. Bosch J, Gerstein HC, Dagenais GR, et al. n-3 fatty acids and cardiovascular 
outcomes in patients with dysglycemia. N Engl J Med. 2012;367:309–318.
 14. Hsia J, Heiss G, Ren H, et al. Calcium/vitamin D supplementation and car-
diovascular events. Circulation. 2007;115:846–854.
 15. Barbarawi M, Kheiri B, Zayed Y, et al. Vitamin D supplementation and car-
diovascular disease risks in more than 83 000 individuals in 21 randomized 
clinical trials: a meta-analysis. JAMA Cardiology. 2019;4:765–776.
 16. Zhang Y, Fang F, Tang J, et al. Association between vitamin D supple-
mentation and mortality: systematic review and meta-analysis. BMJ. 
2019;366:l4673.
 17 . Yusuf S, Dagenais G, et al.; Heart Outcomes Prevention Evaluation Study 
Investigators. Vitamin E supplementation and cardiovascular events in high-
risk patients. N Engl J Med. 2000;342:154–160.
 18. Kim J, Choi J, Kwon SY, et al. Association of multivitamin and mineral sup-
plementation and risk of cardiovascular disease: a systematic review and 
meta-analysis. Circ Cardiovasc Qual Outcomes. 2018;11:e004224.
 19. Cook NR, Albert CM, Gaziano JM, et al. A randomized factorial trial of vita-
mins C and E and beta carotene in the secondary prevention of cardiovas-
cular events in women: results from the women's antioxidant cardiovascular 
study. Arch Intern Med. 2007;167:1610–1618.
 20. Wang X, Chen H, Ouyang Y, et al. Dietary calcium intake and mortality risk 
from cardiovascular disease and all causes: a meta-analysis of prospective 
cohort studies. BMC Med. 2014;12:158.
 21. Myung S-K, Kim H-B, Lee Y-J, et al. Calcium supplements and risk of cardio-
vascular disease: a meta-analysis of clinical trials. Nutrients. 2021;13:368.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on November 12, 2025

CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINESCirculation. 2023;148:e9–e119. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000001168 August 29, 2023
Virani et al 2023 AHA/ACC/ACCP/ASPC/NLA/PCNA Chronic Coronary Disease Guideline e91 22. Lonn E, Bosch J, Yusuf S, et al. Effects of long-term vitamin E supplemen-
tation on cardiovascular events and cancer: a randomized controlled trial. 
JAMA. 2005;293:1338–1347 .
 23. Arnett DK, Blumenthal RS, Albert MA, et al. 2019 ACC/AHA guideline on 
the primary prevention of cardiovascular disease: a report of the American 
College of Cardiology/American Heart Association Task Force on Clinical 
Practice Guidelines. Circulation. 2019;140:e596–e646.
 24. Lopez-Sendon J, Purcell H, Camici P, et al. Chronic stable angina guidelines-
is there an emerging international consensus?. Br J Card. 2012;19(suppl 
2):S2–S11.
 25. Jeong SY, Kovell L, Plante TB, et al. Effects of diet on 10-year athero-
sclerotic cardiovascular disease risk using the pooled cohort equations risk 
calculator: results from the Dash trial. Circulation. 2021;143(suppl 1):A024.
 26. Knuuti J, Wijns W, Saraste A, et al. 2019 ESC guidelines for the diag-
nosis and management of chronic coronary syndromes. Eur Heart J. 
2020;41:407–477 .
 27 . Alderman MH, Davis BR, Piller LB, et al. Should antihypertensive treatment 
recommendations differ in patients with and without coronary heart dis-
ease? (From the Antihypertensive and Lipid-Lowering Treatment to Prevent 
Heart Attack Trial [ALLHAT]). Am J Cardiol. 2016;117:105–115.
 28. Lloyd-Jones DM, Allen NB, Anderson CAM, et al. Life's essential 8: updating 
and enhancing the American Heart Association's construct of cardiovascular 
health: a presidential advisory from the American Heart Association. Circula-
tion. 2022;146:e18–e43.
 29. Van Horn L, Ning H, Steffen L, et al. Dietary factors associated with cardio-
vascular outcomes: 25 year findings from the coronary artery risk develop-
ment in young adults (CARDIA) study. Circulation. 2017;135:AMP069.
 30. Van Horn L, Carson JAS, Appel LJ, et al. Recommended dietary pattern to 
achieve adherence to the American Heart Association/American College of 
Cardiology (AHA/ACC) guidelines: a scientific statement from the Ameri-
can Heart Association. Circulation. 2016;134:e505–e529.
 31. Kris-Etherton PM, Lichtenstein AH, Howard BV, et al. Antioxidant vitamin 
supplements and cardiovascular disease. Circulation. 2004;110:637–641.
 32. National Institutes of Health, Office of Dietary Supplememts. Dietary sup-
plements: what you need to know. Accessed October 10, 2021. https://ods.
od.nih.gov/factsheets/WYNTK-Consumer/.
 33. Singh RB, Rastogi SS, Verma R, et al. Randomised controlled trial of cardio-
protective diet in patients with recent acute myocardial infarction: results of 
one year follow up. BMJ. 1992;304:1015–1019.
 34. Estruch R, Ros E, Salas-Salvado J, et al. Primary prevention of cardiovascu-
lar disease with a Mediterranean diet supplemented with extra-virgin olive 
oil or nuts. N Engl J Med. 2018;378:e34.
 35. Arnold SV, Bhatt DL, Barsness GW, et al. Clinical management of stable 
coronary artery disease in patients with type 2 diabetes mellitus: a sci-
entific statement from the American Heart Association. Circulation. 
2020;141:e779–e806.
 36. Trichopoulou A, Costacou T, Bamia C, et al. Adherence to a Mediterranean 
diet and survival in a Greek population. N Engl J Med. 2003;348:2599–
2608.
 37 . Satija A, Bhupathiraju SN, Spiegelman D, et al. Healthful and unhealthful 
plant-based diets and the risk of coronary heart disease in U.S. adults. J Am 
Coll Cardiol. 2017;70:411–422.
 38. Griel AE, Ruder EH, Kris-Etherton PM. The changing roles of dietary carbo-
hydrates. Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol. 2006;26:1958–1965.
 39. Reynolds A, Mann J, Cummings J, et al. Carbohydrate quality and hu-
man health: a series of systematic reviews and meta-analyses. Lancet. 
2019;393:434–445.
 40. Sacks FM, Katan M. Randomized clinical trials on the effects of dietary fat 
and carbohydrate on plasma lipoproteins and cardiovascular disease. Am J 
Med. 2002;113(suppl 9B):13S–24S.
 41. Whelton PK, Appel LJ, Sacco RL, et al. Sodium, blood pressure, and 
cardiovascular disease: further evidence supporting the American 
Heart Association sodium reduction recommendations. Circulation. 
2012;126:2880–2889.
 42. Juraschek SP, Kovell LC, Appel LJ, et al. Effects of diet and sodium reduc-
tion on cardiac injury, strain, and inflammation: The DASH-Sodium Trial. J 
Am Coll Cardiol. 2021;77:2625–2634.
 43. Anderson CA, Appel LJ, Okuda N, et al. Dietary sources of sodium in China, 
Japan, the United Kingdom, and the United States, women and men aged 
40 to 59 years: the INTERMAP study. J Am Diet Assoc. 2010;110:736–
745.
 44. Frank SM, Jaacks LM, Batis C, et al. Patterns of red and processed meat 
consumption across North America: a nationally representative cross-sec-
tional comparison of dietary recalls from Canada, Mexico, and the United 
States. Int J Environ Res Public Health. 2021;18:357 . 45. Pacheco LS, Lacey JV, Martinez ME, et al. Sugar-sweetened beverage in-
take and cardiovascular disease risk in the California teachers study. J Am 
Heart Assoc. 2020;9:e014883.
 46. Von Philipsborn P, Stratil JM, Burns J, et al. Environmental interventions to 
reduce the consumption of sugar-sweetened beverages and their effects 
on health. Cochrane Database of Syst Rev. 2019;6:CD012292.
 47 . De Souza RJ, Mente A, Maroleanu A, et al. Intake of saturated and trans un-
saturated fatty acids and risk of all cause mortality, cardiovascular disease, 
and type 2 diabetes: systematic review and meta-analysis of observational 
studies. BMJ. 2015;351:h3978.
 48. Bhatti JS, Kaur S, Bhatti GK, et al. Genetic susceptibility of vitamin D recep-
tor (VDR) gene variants (BsmI, TaqI and FokI) to coronary artery disease in 
Asian Indians. Endocr Pract. 2019;25:6A.
 49. De Metrio M, Milazzo V, Rubino M, et al. Vitamin D plasma levels and in-
hospital and 1-year outcomes in acute coronary syndromes: a prospective 
study. Medicine (Baltim). 2015;94:e857 .
 50. Correia LC, Sodre F, Garcia G, et al. Relation of severe deficiency of vitamin 
D to cardiovascular mortality during acute coronary syndromes. Am J Car-
diol. 2013;111:324–327 .
 51. Zhang Y, Tan H, Tang J, et al. Effects of vitamin D supplementation on pre-
vention of type 2 diabetes in patients with prediabetes: a systematic review 
and meta-analysis. Diabetes Care. 2020;43:1650–1658.
 52. Kim H, Caulfield LE, Rebholz CM. Healthy plant-based diets are as-
sociated with lower risk of all-cause mortality in US adults. J Nutr. 
2018;148:624–631.
4.2.2. Mental Health Conditions
 1. Celano CM, Suarez L, Mastromauro C, et al. Feasibility and utility of screen-
ing for depression and anxiety disorders in patients with cardiovascular dis-
ease. Circ Cardiovasc Qual Outcomes. 2013;6:498–504.
 2. Kim J-M, Stewart R, Kang H-J, et al. Long-term cardiac outcomes of de-
pression screening, diagnosis and treatment in patients with acute coronary 
syndrome: the DEPACS study. Psychol Med. 2021;51:964–974.
 3. Kronish IM, Moise N, Cheung YK, et al. Effect of depression screening after 
acute coronary syndromes on quality of life: the CODIACS-QoL randomized 
clinical trial. JAMA Intern Med. 2020;180:45–53.
 4. Vaccarino V, Badimon L, Bremner JD, et al. Depression and coronary heart 
disease: 2018 position paper of the ESC working group on coronary patho-
physiology and microcirculation. Eur Heart J. 2020;41:1687–1696.
 5. Kim JM, Stewart R, Lee YS, et al. Effect of escitalopram vs placebo treat-
ment for depression on long-term cardiac outcomes in patients with acute 
coronary syndrome: a randomized clinical trial. JAMA. 2018;320:350–358.
 6. Smolderen KG, Buchanan DM, Gosch K, et al. Depression treatment and 
1-year mortality after acute myocardial infarction: insights from the TRI-
UMPH registry (Translational Research Investigating Underlying Dispari-
ties in Acute Myocardial Infarction Patients' Health Status). Circulation. 
2017;135:1681–1689.
 7 . Levine GN, Cohen BE, Commodore-Mensah Y, et al. Psychological health, 
well-being, and the mind-heart-body connection: a scientific statement from 
the American Heart Association. Circulation. 2021;143:e763–e783.
 8. World Health Organization. Mental health: strengthening our response. Ac-
cessed November 15, 2021. https://www.who.int/news-room/fact-sheets/
detail/mental-health-strengthening-our-response.
 9. Masters KS, Shaffer JA, Vagnini KM. The impact of psychological function-
ing on cardiovascular disease. Curr Atheroscler Rep. 2020;22:51.
 10. Celano CM, Huffman JC. Depression and cardiac disease: a review. Cardiol 
Rev. 2011;19:130–142.
 11. Thombs BD, Bass EB, Ford DE, et al. Prevalence of depression in survivors 
of acute myocardial infarction. J Gen Intern Med. 2006;21:30–38.
 12. Smaardijk VR, Maas A, Lodder P, et al. Sex and gender-stratified risks of 
psychological factors for adverse clinical outcomes in patients with isch-
emic heart disease: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Int J Cardiol. 
2020;302:21–29.
 13. Larrabee Sonderlund A, Thilsing T, Sondergaard J. Should social discon-
nectedness be included in primary-care screening for cardiometabolic 
disease? A systematic review of the relationship between everyday stress, 
social connectedness, and allostatic load. PLoS One. 2019;14:e0226717 .
 14. Kim J, Yang KH, Choi AR, et al. Healthcare quality assessments: no guaran-
tees of same outcomes for different socio-economic stroke patients. Int J 
Qual Health Care. 2021;33:mzab081.
 15. Taylor CB, Youngblood ME, Catellier D, et al. Effects of antidepressant medi-
cation on morbidity and mortality in depressed patients after myocardial in-
farction. Arch Gen Psychiatry. 2005;62:792–798.
 16. Gulliksson M, Burell G, Vessby B, et al. Randomized controlled trial of cognitive 
behavioral therapy vs standard treatment to prevent recurrent cardiovascular  
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on November 12, 2025

CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINESAugust 29, 2023 Circulation. 2023;148:e9–e119. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000001168
Virani et al 2023 AHA/ACC/ACCP/ASPC/NLA/PCNA Chronic Coronary Disease Guideline e92events in patients with coronary heart disease: Secondary Preven-
tion in Uppsala Primary Health Care project (SUPRIM). Arch Intern Med. 
2011;171:134–140.
 17 . Fernandes N, Prada L, Rosa MM, et al. The impact of SSRIs on mortality and 
cardiovascular events in patients with coronary artery disease and depres-
sion: systematic review and meta-analysis. Clin Res Cardiol. 2021;110:183–
193.
 18. Sara JD, Prasad M, Eleid MF, et al. Association between work-related stress 
and coronary heart disease: a review of prospective studies through the job 
strain, effort-reward balance, and organizational justice models. J Am Heart 
Assoc. 2018;7:e008073.
 19. Brewer LC, Redmond N, Slusser JP, et al. Stress and achievement of car-
diovascular health metrics: the American Heart Association Life's Simple 7 
in blacks of the Jackson Heart Study. J Am Heart Assoc. 2018;7:e008855.
 20. Jiao Z, Kakoulides SV, Moscona J, et al. Effect of Hurricane Katrina on in-
cidence of acute myocardial infarction in New Orleans three years after the 
storm. Am J Cardiol. 2012;109:502–505.
 21. Ayotte BJ, Hausmann LR, Whittle J, et al. The relationship between 
perceived discrimination and coronary artery obstruction. Am Heart J. 
2012;163:677–683.
 22. Langford AT, Butler M, Booth JN, et al. Stress and depression are associ-
ated with life's simple 7 among African Americans with hypertension: find-
ings from the Jackson Heart Study. Am J Hypertens. 2021;34:1311–1321.
 23. Le J, Dorstyn DS, Mpofu E, et al. Health-related quality of life in coronary 
heart disease: a systematic review and meta-analysis mapped against the 
International Classification of Functioning, Disability and Health. Qual Life 
Res. 2018;27:2491–2503.
 24. Wellenius GA, Mukamal KJ, Kulshreshtha A, et al. Depressive symptoms 
and the risk of atherosclerotic progression among patients with coronary 
artery bypass grafts. Circulation. 2008;117:2313–2319.
 25. Barth J, Schumacher M, Herrmann-Lingen C. Depression as a risk factor for 
mortality in patients with coronary heart disease: a meta-analysis. Psycho-
som Med. 2004;66:802–813.
 26. Lichtman JH, Froelicher ES, Blumenthal JA, et al. Depression as a risk 
factor for poor prognosis among patients with acute coronary syndrome: 
systematic review and recommendations: a scientific statement from the 
American Heart Association. Circulation. 2014;129:1350–1369.
 27 . Cohen BE, Edmondson D, Kronish IM. State of the art review: depression, 
stress, anxiety, and cardiovascular disease. Am J Hypertens. 2015;28:1295–
1302.
 28. Jiang W, Velazquez EJ, Kuchibhatla M, et al. Effect of escitalopram on men-
tal stress-induced myocardial ischemia: results of the REMIT trial. JAMA. 
2013;309:2139–2149.
 29. Celano CM, Millstein RA, Bedoya CA, et al. Association between anxiety and 
mortality in patients with coronary artery disease: a meta-analysis. Am Heart 
J. 2015;170:1105–1115.
 30. Arnold SV, Smolderen KG, Buchanan DM, et al. Perceived stress in myocar-
dial infarction: long-term mortality and health status outcomes. J Am Coll 
Cardiol. 2012;60:1756–1763.
 31. Kroenke K, Spitzer RL, Williams JB. The Patient Health Questionnaire-2: 
validity of a two-item depression screener. Med Care. 2003;41:1284–1292.
 32. Plummer F, Manea L, Trepel D, et al. Screening for anxiety disorders with the 
GAD-7 and GAD-2: a systematic review and diagnostic metaanalysis. Gen 
Hosp Psychiatry. 2016;39:24–31.
 33. Hasnain M, Vieweg WVR, Lesnefsky EJ, et al. Depression screening in pa-
tients with coronary heart disease: a critical evaluation of the AHA guide-
lines. J Psychosom Res. 2011;71:6–12.
 34. Ladwig S, Zhou Z, Xu Y, et al. Comparison of treatment rates of depression 
after stroke versus myocardial infarction: a systematic review and meta-
analysis of observational data. Psychosom Med. 2018;80:754–763.
 35. Berkman LF, Blumenthal J, Burg M, et al. Effects of treating depression and 
low perceived social support on clinical events after myocardial infarction: 
the Enhancing Recovery in Coronary Heart Disease Patients (ENRICHD) 
Randomized Trial. JAMA. 2003;289:3106–3116.
 36. Glassman AH, O'Connor CM, Califf RM, et al. Sertraline treatment of 
major depression in patients with acute MI or unstable angina. JAMA. 
2002;288:701–709.
 37 . van Melle JP, de Jonge P, Honig A, et al. Effects of antidepressant treatment 
following myocardial infarction. Br J Psychiatry. 2007;190:460–466.
 38. Doyle F, Freedland KE, Carney RM, et al. Hybrid systematic review and 
network meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials of interventions for 
depressive symptoms in patients with coronary artery disease. Psychsom 
Med. 2021;83:423–431.
 39. Rutledge T, Redwine LS, Linke SE, et al. A meta-analysis of mental health 
treatments and cardiac rehabilitation for improving clinical outcomes and depression among patients with coronary heart disease. Psychosom Med. 
2013;75:335–349.
 40. Blumenthal JA, Sherwood A, Smith PJ, et al. Enhancing cardiac rehabilita-
tion with stress management training: a randomized, clinical efficacy trial. 
Circulation. 2016;133:1341–1350.
 41. Scott-Sheldon LAJ, Gathright EC, Donahue ML, et al. Mindfulness-based 
interventions for adults with cardiovascular disease: a systematic review and 
meta-analysis. Ann Behav Med. 2020;54:67–73.
 42. Nijjar PS, Connett JE, Lindquist R, et al. Randomized trial of mindfulness-
based stress reduction in cardiac patients eligible for cardiac rehabilitation. 
Sci Rep. 2019;9:18415.
 43. Ski CF, Jelinek M, Jackson AC, et al. Psychosocial interventions for patients 
with coronary heart disease and depression: a systematic review and meta-
analysis. Eur J Cardiovasc Nurs. 2016;15:305–316.
 44. Zhang Y, Liang Y, Huang H, et al. Systematic review and meta-analysis of 
psychological intervention on patients with coronary heart disease. Ann Pal-
liat Med. 2021;10:8848–8857 .
 45. Ostuzzi G, Turrini G, Gastaldon C, et al. Efficacy and acceptability of antide-
pressants in patients with ischemic heart disease: systematic review and 
meta-analysis. Int Clin Psychopharmacol. 2019;34:65–75.
 46. Levine GN. The mind-heart-body connection. Circulation. 2019;140:1363–
1365.
4.2.3. Tobacco Products
 1. US Department of Health and Human Services. Tobacco Use and Depen-
dence Guideline Panel Treating Tobacco Use and Dependence: 2008 Up-
date. US Department of Health and Human Services; 2008.
 2. Babb S, Malarcher A, Schauer G, et al. Quitting smoking among 
adults - United States, 2000-2015. 2017 . 1545-861X (Electronic) 
0149-2195. Accessed Jan 6, 2021. https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/28056007 .
 3. Jamal A, Dube SR, Malarcher AM, et al. Tobacco use screening and coun-
seling during physician office visits among adults--National Ambulatory 
Medical Care Survey and National Health Interview Survey, United States, 
2005-2009. MMWR Suppl. 2012;61:38–45.
 4. Stead LF, Buitrago D, Preciado N, et al. Physician advice for smoking cessa-
tion. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2013;2013:CD000165.
 5. Lindson N, Chepkin SC, Y e W, et al. Different doses, durations and modes 
of delivery of nicotine replacement therapy for smoking cessation. Cochrane 
Database Syst Rev. 2019;4:CD013308.
 6. Suissa K, Lariviere J, Eisenberg MJ, et al. Efficacy and safety of smoking 
cessation interventions in patients with cardiovascular disease: a network 
meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials. Circ Cardiovasc Qual Out-
comes. 2017;10:e002458.
 7 . Hartmann-Boyce J, Livingstone-Banks J, Ordonez-Mena JM, et al. Behav-
ioural interventions for smoking cessation: an overview and network meta-
analysis. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2021;1:CD013229.
 8. Skotsimara G, Antonopoulos AS, Oikonomou E, et al. Cardiovascular effects 
of electronic cigarettes: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Eur J Prev 
Cardiol. 2019;26:1219–1228.
 9. Hartmann-Boyce J, McRobbie H, Lindson N, et al. Electronic cigarettes for 
smoking cessation. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2021;4:CD010216.
 10. Hajek P, Phillips-Waller A, Przulj D, et al. A randomized trial of e-cigarettes 
versus nicotine-replacement therapy. N Engl J Med. 2019;380:629–637 .
 11. He J, Vupputuri S, Allen K, et al. Passive smoking and the risk of coro-
nary heart disease-a meta-analysis of epidemiologic studies. N Engl J Med. 
1999;340:920–926.
 12. Panagiotakos DB, Pitsavos C, Stefanadis C. Chronic exposure to second 
hand smoke and 30-day prognosis of patients hospitalised with acute 
coronary syndromes: the Greek study of acute coronary syndromes. Heart. 
2007;93:309–312.
 13. Arnett DK, Blumenthal RS, Albert MA, et al. 2019 ACC/AHA guideline on 
the primary prevention of cardiovascular disease: a report of the American 
College of Cardiology/American Heart Association Task Force on Clinical 
Practice Guidelines. Circulation. 2019;140:e596–e646.
 14. Duncan MS, Freiberg MS, Greevy RA Jr., et al. Association of smok-
ing cessation with subsequent risk of cardiovascular disease. JAMA. 
2019;322:642–650.
 15. Ding N, Sang Y, Chen J, et al. Cigarette smoking, smoking cessation, 
and long-term risk of 3 major atherosclerotic diseases. J Am Coll Cardiol. 
2019;74:498–507 .
 16. Franck C, Filion KB, Eisenberg MJ. Smoking cessation in patients with 
acute coronary syndrome. Am J Cardiol. 2018;121:1105–1111.
 17 . Willett J, Achenbach S, Pinto FJ, et al. The tobacco endgame: eradicating a 
worsening epidemic: a joint opinion from the American Heart Association, 
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on November 12, 2025

CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINESCirculation. 2023;148:e9–e119. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000001168 August 29, 2023
Virani et al 2023 AHA/ACC/ACCP/ASPC/NLA/PCNA Chronic Coronary Disease Guideline e93World Heart Federation, American College of Cardiology, and the European 
Society of Cardiology. Circulation. 2021;143:e1–e5.
 18. Tonstad S, Svendsen M. Premature coronary heart disease, cigarette smok-
ing, and the metabolic syndrome. Am J Cardiol. 2005;96:1681–1685.
 19. Roy A, Rawal I, Jabbour S, et al. Tobacco and Cardiovascular Disease: A 
Summary of Evidence. The International Bank for Reconstruction and Devel-
opment/The World Bank; 2017 .
 20. Johnson HM, Gossett LK, Piper ME, et al. Effects of smoking and smoking 
cessation on endothelial function: 1-year outcomes from a randomized clini-
cal trial. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2010;55:1988–1995.
 21. van Berkel TF, Boersma H, Roos-Hesselink JW, et al. Impact of smoking 
cessation and smoking interventions in patients with coronary heart disease. 
Eur Heart J. 1999;20:1773–1782.
 22. Critchley JA, Capewell S. Mortality risk reduction associated with smok-
ing cessation in patients with coronary heart disease: a systematic review. 
JAMA. 2003;290:86–97 .
 23. Gupta R, Gupta S, Sharma S, et al. Risk of coronary heart disease among 
smokeless tobacco users: results of systematic review and meta-analysis of 
global data. Nicotine Tob Res. 2019;21:25–31.
 24. Boffetta P, Straif K. Use of smokeless tobacco and risk of myocar-
dial infarction and stroke: systematic review with meta-analysis. BMJ. 
2009;339:b3060.
 25. Hansson J, Galanti MR, Hergens MP, et al. Use of snus and acute myocar-
dial infarction: pooled analysis of eight prospective observational studies. 
Eur J Epidemiol. 2012;27:771–779.
 26. Arefalk G, Hambraeus K, Lind L, et al. Discontinuation of smokeless tobac-
co and mortality risk after myocardial infarction. Circulation. 2014;130:325–
332.
 27 . Boyle R, Solberg L, Fiore M. Use of electronic health records to support 
smoking cessation. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2014;CD008743.
 28. Thomas D, Abramson MJ, Bonevski B, et al. System change in-
terventions for smoking cessation. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 
2017;2:CD010742.
 29. Bhatnagar A, Whitsel LP, Ribisl KM, et al. Electronic cigarettes: a policy state-
ment from the American Heart Association. Circulation. 2014;130:1418–
1436.
 30. Biondi-Zoccai G, Sciarretta S, Bullen C, et al. Acute effects of heat-not-
burn, electronic vaping, and traditional tobacco combustion cigarettes: the 
Sapienza University of Rome-Vascular Assessment of Proatherosclerotic 
Effects of Smoking (SUR -VAPES) 2 randomized trial. J Am Heart Assoc. 
2019;8:e010455.
 31. Farsalinos KE, Tsiapras D, Kyrzopoulos S, et al. Acute effects of using an 
electronic nicotine-delivery device (electronic cigarette) on myocardial func-
tion: comparison with the effects of regular cigarettes. BMC Cardiovasc Dis-
ord. 2014;14:78.
 32. Benowitz NL, Fraiman JB. Cardiovascular effects of electronic cigarettes. 
Nat Rev Cardiol. 2017;14:447–456.
 33. George J, Hussain M, Vadiveloo T, et al. Cardiovascular effects of switch-
ing from tobacco cigarettes to electronic cigarettes. J Am Coll Cardiol. 
2019;74:3112–3120.
 34. Ikonomidis I, Vlastos D, Kourea K, et al. Electronic cigarette smoking in-
creases arterial stiffness and oxidative stress to a lesser extent than a 
single conventional cigarette: an acute and chronic study. Circulation. 
2018;137:303–306.
 35. Qasim H, Karim ZA, Rivera JO, et al. Impact of electronic cigarettes on the 
cardiovascular system. J Am Heart Assoc. 2017;6:e006353.
 36. Benowitz NL, St Helen G, Nardone N, et al. Twenty-four-hour cardiovascular 
effects of electronic cigarettes compared with cigarette smoking in dual 
users. J Am Heart Assoc. 2020;9:e017317 .
 37 . Shahandeh N, Chowdhary H, Middlekauff HR. Vaping and cardiac disease. 
Heart. 2021;107:1530–1535.
 38. Barua RS, Rigotti NA, Benowitz NL, et al. 2018 ACC expert consensus 
decision pathway on tobacco cessation treatment: a report of the American 
College of Cardiology Task Force on Clinical Expert Consensus Documents. 
J Am Coll Cardiol. 2018;72:3332–3365.
 39. Barth J, Jacob T, Daha I, et al. Psychosocial interventions for smoking ces-
sation in patients with coronary heart disease. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 
2015;CD006886.
 40. Ford CL, Zlabek JA. Nicotine replacement therapy and cardiovascular dis-
ease. Mayo Clin Proc. 2005;80:652–656.
 41. Tzivoni D, Keren A, Meyler S, et al. Cardiovascular safety of transdermal 
nicotine patches in patients with coronary artery disease who try to quit 
smoking. Cardiovasc Drugs Ther. 1998;12:239–244.
 42. Benowitz NL, Gourlay SG. Cardiovascular toxicity of nicotine: implications 
for nicotine replacement therapy. J Am Coll Cardiol. 1997;29:1422–1431. 43. Joseph AM, Norman SM, Ferry LH, et al. The safety of transdermal nicotine 
as an aid to smoking cessation in patients with cardiac disease. N Engl J 
Med. 1996;335:1792–1798.
 44. Benowitz NL, Pipe A, West R, et al. Cardiovascular safety of varenicline, 
bupropion, and nicotine patch in smokers: a randomized clinical trial. JAMA 
Intern Med. 2018;178:622–631.
 45. Lindson N, Chepkin SC, Y e W, et al. Different doses, durations and modes 
of delivery of nicotine replacement therapy for smoking cessation. Cochrane 
Database Syst Rev. 2019;4:CD013308.
 46. Cahill K, Stevens S, Perera R, et al. Pharmacological interventions for smok-
ing cessation: an overview and network meta-analysis. Cochrane Database 
Syst Rev. 2013;2013:CD009329.
 47 . Hartmann-Boyce J, Hong B, Livingstone-Banks J, et al. Additional behav-
ioural support as an adjunct to pharmacotherapy for smoking cessation. 
Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2019;6:CD009670.
 48. Sterling LH, Windle SB, Filion KB, et al. Varenicline and adverse cardiovas-
cular events: a systematic review and meta-analysis of randomized con-
trolled trials. J Am Heart Assoc. 2016;5:e002849.
 49. Cahill K, Lindson-Hawley N, Thomas KH, et al. Nicotine receptor par-
tial agonists for smoking cessation. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 
2016;5:CD006103.
 50. Barnoya J, Glantz SA. Cardiovascular effects of secondhand smoke: nearly 
as large as smoking. Circulation. 2005;111:2684–2698.
 51. Glantz SA, Parmley WW. Passive smoking and heart disease: mechanisms 
and risk. JAMA. 1995;273:1047–1053.
 52. Morris PB, Ference BA, Jahangir E, et al. Cardiovascular effects of exposure 
to cigarette smoke and electronic cigarettes: clinical perspectives from the 
Prevention of Cardiovascular Disease Section Leadership Council and Early 
Career Councils of the American College of Cardiology. J Am Coll Cardiol. 
2015;66:1378–1391.
4.2.4. Alcohol and Substance Use
 1. DeFilippis EM, Bajaj NS, Singh A, et al. Marijuana use in patients with 
cardiovascular disease: JACC review topic of the week. J Am Coll Cardiol. 
2020;75:320–332.
 2. DeFilippis EM, Singh A, Divakaran S, et al. Cocaine and marijuana use among 
young adults with myocardial infarction. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2018;71:2540–
2551.
 3. Grant BF, Chou SP, Saha TD, et al. Prevalence of 12-month alcohol use, 
high-risk drinking, and DSM-IV alcohol use disorder in the United States, 
2001-2002 to 2012-2013: results from the National Epidemiologic Survey 
on Alcohol and Related Conditions. JAMA Psychiatry. 2017;74:911–923.
 4. McNeely J, Cleland CM, Strauss SM, et al. Validation of self-administered 
single-item screening questions (SISQs) for unhealthy alcohol and drug use 
in primary care patients. J Gen Intern Med. 2015;30:1757–1764.
 5. Schwartz BG, Rezkalla S, Kloner RA. Cardiovascular effects of cocaine. Cir-
culation. 2010;122:2558–2569.
 6. Costanzo S, Di Castelnuovo A, Donati MB, et al. Alcohol consumption and 
mortality in patients with cardiovascular disease: a meta-analysis. J Am Coll 
Cardiol. 2010;55:1339–1347 .
 7 . Costanzo S, Di Castelnuovo A, Donati MB, et al. Wine, beer or spirit drinking 
in relation to fatal and non-fatal cardiovascular events: a meta-analysis. Eur 
J Epidemiol. 2011;26:833–850.
 8. Biddinger KJ, Emdin CA, Haas ME, et al. Association of habitual al-
cohol intake with risk of cardiovascular disease. JAMA Netw Open. 
2022;5:e223849.
 9. Mukamal KJ, Maclure M, Muller JE, et al. Binge drinking and mortality after 
acute myocardial infarction. Circulation. 2005;112:3839–3845.
 10. Ruidavets JB, Ducimetiere P, Evans A, et al. Patterns of alcohol consump-
tion and ischaemic heart disease in culturally divergent countries: the Pro-
spective Epidemiological Study of Myocardial Infarction (PRIME). BMJ. 
2010;341:c6077 .
 11. Lichtenstein AH, Appel LJ, Vadiveloo M, et al. 2021 Dietary guidance to im-
prove cardiovascular health: a scientific statement from the American Heart 
Association. Circulation. 2021;144:e472–e487 .
 12. Page RL 2nd, Allen LA, Kloner RA, et al. Medical marijuana, recreational 
cannabis, and cardiovascular health: a scientific statement from the Ameri-
can Heart Association. Circulation. 2020;142:e131–e152.
 13. Ravi D, Ghasemiesfe M, Korenstein D, et al. Associations between marijua-
na use and cardiovascular risk factors and outcomes: a systematic review. 
Ann Intern Med. 2018;168:187–194.
 14. Dezfulian C, Orkin AM, Maron BA, et al. Opioid-associated out-of-hospital 
cardiac arrest: distinctive clinical features and implications for health care 
and public responses: a scientific statement from the American Heart As-
sociation. Circulation. 2021;143:e836–e870.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on November 12, 2025

CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINESAugust 29, 2023 Circulation. 2023;148:e9–e119. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000001168
Virani et al 2023 AHA/ACC/ACCP/ASPC/NLA/PCNA Chronic Coronary Disease Guideline e94 15. Mahtta D, Ramsey D, Krittanawong C, et al. Recreational substance use 
among patients with premature atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease. 
Heart. 2021;107:650–656.
 16. Rimm EB, Williams P, Fosher K, et al. Moderate alcohol intake and lower risk 
of coronary heart disease: meta-analysis of effects on lipids and haemo-
static factors. BMJ. 1999;319:1523–1528.
 17 . NIAAA. What's a “standard drink”? Accessed June 30, 2021. https://www.  
rethinkingdrinking.niaaa.nih.gov/How-much-is-too-much/what-counts-as-a-
drink/whats-A-Standard-drink.aspx#:∼ :text=-%20Rethinking%20Drinking%20
-%20NIAAA%20What%27s%20a%20%E2%80%9Cstandard,fluid%20
ounces%20or%2014%20grams%20of%20pure%20alcohol.
 18. Di Castelnuovo A, Rotondo S, Iacoviello L, et al. Meta-analysis of wine and 
beer consumption in relation to vascular risk. Circulation. 2002;105:2836–
2844.
 19. GBD. 2016 Alcohol Collaborators. Alcohol use and burden for 195 coun-
tries and territories, 1990-2016: a systematic analysis for the Global Bur-
den of Disease Study 2016. Lancet. 2018;392:1015–1035.
 20. Heesch CM, Wilhelm CR, Ristich J, et al. Cocaine activates platelets and 
increases the formation of circulating platelet containing microaggregates 
in humans. Heart. 2000;83:688–695.
 21. Mukherjee D, Lange RA. Management of cocaine-associated non-ST-seg-
ment elevation myocardial infarction: is an invasive approach beneficial? J 
Am Coll Cardiol Intv. 2021;14:637–638.
 22. Singleton JH, Abner EL, Akpunonu PD, et al. Association of nonacute opioid 
use and cardiovascular diseases: a scoping review of the literature. J Am 
Heart Assoc. 2021;10:e021260.
 23. Monte AA, Shelton SK, Mills E, et al. Acute illness associated with can-
nabis use, by route of exposure: an observational study. Ann Intern Med. 
2019;170:531–537 .
4.2.5. Sexual Health and Activity
 1. Lukkarinen H, Lukkarinen O. Sexual satisfaction among patients after coro-
nary bypass surgery or percutaneous transluminal angioplasty: eight-year 
follow-up. Heart Lung. 2007;36:262–269.
 2. Dahabreh IJ, Paulus JK. Association of episodic physical and sexual activity 
with triggering of acute cardiac events: systematic review and meta-analy-
sis. JAMA. 2011;305:1225–1233.
 3. Muller JE, Mittleman MA, Maclure M, et al. Triggering myocardial infarc-
tion by sexual activity. Low absolute risk and prevention by regular physical 
exertion. Determinants of Myocardial Infarction Onset Study Investigators. 
JAMA. 1996;275:1405–1409.
 4. Corona G, Razzoli E, Forti G, et al. The use of phosphodiesterase 5 inhibitors 
with concomitant medications. J Endocrinol Invest. 2008;31:799–808.
 5. Levine GN, Steinke EE, Bakaeen FG, et al. Sexual activity and cardiovas-
cular disease: a scientific statement from the American Heart Association. 
Circulation. 2012;125:1058–1072.
 6. Parzeller M, Raschka C, Bratzke H. Sudden cardiovascular death during 
sexual intercourse--results of a legal medicine autopsy study. Z Kardiol. 
1999;88:44–48.
 7 . Foy CG, Newman JC, Berlowitz DR, et al. Blood pressure, sexual activ-
ity, and erectile function in hypertensive men: baseline findings from 
the Systolic Blood Pressure Intervention Trial (SPRINT). J Sex Med. 
2019;16:235–247 .
 8. Lapierre H, Chan V, Sohmer B, et al. Minimally invasive coronary artery by-
pass grafting via a small thoracotomy versus off-pump: a case-matched 
study. Eur J Cardiothorac Surg. 2011;40:804–810.
 9. Palm P, Zwisler AO, Svendsen JH, et al. Sexual rehabilitation for car-
diac patients with erectile dysfunction: a randomised clinical trial. Heart. 
2019;105:775–782.
 10. Boothby CA, Dada BR, Rabi DM, et al. The effect of cardiac rehabilitation 
attendance on sexual activity outcomes in cardiovascular disease patients: 
a systematic review. Can J Cardiol. 2018;34:1590–1599.
4.2.6. Lipid Management
 1. LaRosa JC, Grundy SM, Waters DD, et al. Intensive lipid lowering with 
atorvastatin in patients with stable coronary disease. N Engl J Med. 
2005;352:1425–1435.
 2. Baigent C, Blackwell L, Emberson J, et al. Efficacy and safety of more 
intensive lowering of LDL cholesterol: a meta-analysis of data from 
170 000 participants in 26 randomised trials. Lancet. 2010;376:1670–
1681.
 3. Cholesterol Treatment Trialists' Collaboration. Efficacy and safety of statin 
therapy in older people: a meta-analysis of individual participant data from 
28 randomised controlled trials. Lancet. 2019;393:407–415. 4. Randomised trial of cholesterol lowering in 4444 patients with coronary 
heart disease:the Scandinavian Simvastatin Survival Study (4S). Lancet. 
1994;344:1383–1389.
 5. Sacks FM, Pfeffer MA, Moye LA, et al. The effect of pravastatin on coro-
nary events after myocardial infarction in patients with average cholesterol 
levels. Cholesterol and Recurrent Events Trial investigators. N Engl J Med. 
1996;335:1001–1009.
 6. Long-Term Intervention with Pravastin in Ischaemic Disease (LIPID) Study 
Group. Prevention of cardiovascular events and death with pravastatin in 
patients with coronary heart disease and a broad range of initial cholesterol 
levels. N Engl J Med. 1998;339:1349–1357 .
 7 . Post Coronary Artery Bypass Graft Trial Investigators. The effect of aggres-
sive lowering of low-density lipoprotein cholesterol levels and low-dose 
anticoagulation on obstructive changes in saphenous-vein coronary-artery 
bypass grafts. N Engl J Med. 1997;336:153–162.
 8. Heart Protection Study Collaborative Group. MRC/BHF Heart protection 
study of antioxidant vitamin supplementation in 20 536 high-risk individuals: 
a randomised placebo-controlled trial. Lancet. 2002;360:23–33.
 9. Jia X, Ramsey DJ, Rifai MA, et al. Impact of lipid monitoring on treatment 
intensification of cholesterol lowering therapies (from the Veterans Affairs 
Healthcare System). Am J Cardiol. 2020;125:874–879.
 10. Rana JS, Virani SS, Moffet HH, et al. Association of low-density lipoprotein 
testing after an atherosclerotic cardiovascular event with subsequent statin 
adherence and intensification. Am J Med. 2021
 11. Karlson BW, Wiklund O, Palmer MK, et al. Variability of low-density lipopro-
tein cholesterol response with different doses of atorvastatin, rosuvastatin, 
and simvastatin: results from VOYAGER. Eur Heart J Cardiovasc Pharmaco-
ther. 2016;2:212–217 .
 12. Kazi DS, Moran AE, Coxson PG, et al. Cost-effectiveness of PCSK9 inhibi-
tor therapy in patients with heterozygous familial hypercholesterolemia or 
atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease. JAMA. 2016;316:743–753.
 13. Anderson JL, Heidenreich PA, Barnett PG, et al. ACC/AHA statement on 
cost/value methodology in clinical practice guidelines and performance 
measures: a report of the American College of Cardiology/American Heart 
Association Task Force on Performance Measures and Task Force on Prac-
tice Guidelines. Circulation. 2014;129:2329–2345.
 14. Bohula EA, Morrow DA, Giugliano RP, et al. Atherothrombotic risk strati-
fication and ezetimibe for secondary prevention. J Am Coll Cardiol. 
2017;69:911–921.
 15. Cannon CP, Blazing MA, Giugliano RP, et al. Ezetimibe added to statin ther-
apy after acute coronary syndromes. N Engl J Med. 2015;372:2387–2397 .
 16. Bach RG, Cannon CP, Giugliano RP, et al. Effect of simvastatin-ezetimibe 
compared with simvastatin monotherapy after acute coronary syndrome 
among patients 75 years or older: a secondary analysis of a randomized 
clinical trial. JAMA Cardiol. 2019;4:846–854.
 17 . Bonaca MP, Gutierrez JA, Cannon C, et al. Polyvascular disease, type 2 dia-
betes, and long-term vascular risk: a secondary analysis of the IMPROVE-IT 
trial. Lancet Diabetes Endocrinol. 2018;6:934–943.
 18. Cannon CP, Khan I, Klimchak AC, et al. Simulation of lipid-lowering therapy 
intensification in a population with atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease. 
JAMA Cardiol. 2017;2:959–966.
 19. Virani SS, Akeroyd JM, Nambi V, et al. Estimation of eligibility for proprotein 
convertase subtilisin/kexin type 9 inhibitors and associated costs based 
on the FOURIER trial (Further Cardiovascular Outcomes Research with 
PCSK9 Inhibition in Subjects with Elevated Risk): insights from the Depart-
ment of Veterans Affairs. Circulation. 2017;135:2572–2574.
 20. Institute for Clinical and Economic Review. Alirocumab for treatment of high 
cholesterol: effectiveness and value: new evidence update. 2019. Accessed 
March 1, 2022. https://icer.org/wp-content/uploads/2020/10/ICER_Ali-
rocumab_Final_NEU_021519.pdf.
 21. Kazi DS, Penko J, Coxson PG, et al. Cost-effectiveness of alirocumab: a 
just-in-time analysis based on the ODYSSEY outcomes trial. Ann Intern Med. 
2019;170:221–229.
 22. Sabatine MS, Giugliano RP, Keech AC, et al. Evolocumab and clini-
cal outcomes in patients with cardiovascular disease. N Engl J Med. 
2017;376:1713–1722.
 23. Schwartz GG, Steg PG, Szarek M, et al. Alirocumab and cardiovascular 
outcomes after acute coronary syndrome. N Engl J Med. 2018;379:2097–
2107 .
 24. Talasaz AH, Ho AJ, Bhatty F, et al. Meta-analysis of clinical outcomes of 
PCSK9 modulators in patients with established ASCVD. Pharmacotherapy. 
2021;41:1009–1023.
 25. Murphy SA, Pedersen TR, Gaciong ZA, et al. Effect of the PCSK9 inhibitor 
evolocumab on total cardiovascular events in patients with cardiovascular 
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on November 12, 2025

CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINESCirculation. 2023;148:e9–e119. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000001168 August 29, 2023
Virani et al 2023 AHA/ACC/ACCP/ASPC/NLA/PCNA Chronic Coronary Disease Guideline e95disease: a prespecified analysis from the FOURIER Trial. JAMA Cardiol. 
2019;4:613–619.
 26. Sabatine MS, De Ferrari GM, Giugliano RP, et al. Clinical benefit of evo-
locumab by severity and extent of coronary artery disease: analysis from 
FOURIER. Circulation. 2018;138:756–766.
 27 . Jukema JW, Szarek M, Zijlstra LE, et al. Alirocumab in patients with polyvas-
cular disease and recent acute coronary syndrome: ODYSSEY OUTCOMES 
trial. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2019;74:1167–1176.
 28. Roe MT, Li QH, Bhatt DL, et al. Risk categorization using New American 
College of Cardiology/American Heart Association guidelines for choles-
terol management and its relation to alirocumab treatment following acute 
coronary syndromes. Circulation. 2019;140:1578–1589.
 29. Giugliano RP, Mach F, Zavitz K, et al. Cognitive function in a randomized trial 
of evolocumab. N Engl J Med. 2017;377:633–643.
 30. Bhatt DL, Briggs AH, Reed SD, et al. Cost-effectiveness of Alirocumab in 
patients with acute coronary syndromes: the ODYSSEY OUTCOMES trial. J 
Am Coll Cardiol. 2020;75:2297–2308.
 31. Fonarow GC, van Hout B, Villa G, et al. Updated cost-effectiveness analysis 
of evolocumab in patients with very high-risk atherosclerotic cardiovascular 
disease. JAMA Cardiol. 2019;4:691–695.
 32. Bhatt DL, Steg PG, Miller M, et al. Cardiovascular risk reduction with icosa-
pent ethyl for hypertriglyceridemia. New Engl J Med. 2019;380:11–22.
 33. Ray KK, Bays HE, Catapano AL, et al. Safety and efficacy of bempedoic 
acid to reduce LDL cholesterol. N Engl J Med. 2019;380:1022–1032.
 34. Goldberg AC, Leiter LA, Stroes ESG, et al. Effect of bempedoic acid vs pla-
cebo added to maximally tolerated statins on low-density lipoprotein choles-
terol in patients at high risk for cardiovascular disease: the CLEAR Wisdom 
randomized clinical trial. JAMA. 2019;322:1780–1788.
 35. Ray KK, Wright RS, Kallend D, et al. Two phase 3 trials of inclisiran in pa-
tients with elevated LDL cholesterol. N Engl J Med. 2020;382:1507–1519.
 36. Investigators A-H, Boden WE, Probstfield JL, et al. Niacin in patients with 
low HDL cholesterol levels receiving intensive statin therapy. N Engl J Med. 
2011;365:2255–2267 .
 37 . Landray MJ, Haynes R, et al.; HPS2-THRIVE Collaborative Group. Effects of 
extended-release niacin with laropiprant in high-risk patients. N Engl J Med. 
2014;371:203–212.
 38. Ference BA, Ginsberg HN, Graham I, et al. Low-density lipoproteins cause 
atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease. 1. Evidence from genetic, epidemi-
ologic, and clinical studies. A consensus statement from the European Ath-
erosclerosis Society Consensus Panel. Eur Heart J. 2017;38:2459–2472.
 39. Galan P, Kesse-Guyot E, Czernichow S, et al. Effects of B vitamins and 
omega 3 fatty acids on cardiovascular diseases: a randomised placebo con-
trolled trial. BMJ. 2010;341:c6273.
 40. Kromhout D, Giltay EJ, Geleijnse JM, et al. n-3 fatty acids and cardiovascu-
lar events after myocardial infarction. N Engl J Med. 2010;363:2015–2026.
 41. Kalstad AA, Myhre PL, Laake K, et al. Effects of n-3 fatty acid supplements 
in elderly patients after myocardial infarction: a randomized, controlled trial. 
Circulation. 2021;143:528–539.
 42. Grundy SM, Stone NJ, Bailey AL, et al. 2018 AHA/ACC/AACVPR/AAPA/
ABC/ACPM/ADA/AGS/APhA/ASPC/NLA/PCNA guideline on the man-
agement of blood cholesterol: a report of the American College of Cardiol-
ogy/American Heart Association Task Force on Clinical Practice Guidelines. 
Circulation. 2019;139:e1082–e1143.
 43. Bangalore S, Fayyad R, Kastelein JJ, et al. 2013 Cholesterol guidelines re-
visited: percent LDL cholesterol reduction or attained LDL cholesterol level 
or both for prognosis?. Am J Med. 2016;129:384–391.
 44. Wiggins BS, Saseen JJ, Page RL 2nd, et al. Recommendations for 
management of clinically significant drug-drug interactions with statins 
and select agents used in patients with cardiovascular disease: a sci-
entific statement from the American Heart Association. Circulation. 
2016;134:e468–e495.
 45. Cheeley MK, Saseen JJ, Agarwala A, et al. NLA scientific statement on 
statin intolerance: a new definition and key considerations for ASCVD risk 
reduction in the statin intolerant patient. J Clin Lipidol. 2022;16:361–375.
 46. Howard JP, Wood FA, Finegold JA, et al. Side effect patterns in a crossover 
trial of statin, placebo, and no treatment. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2021;78:1210–
1222.
 47 . Warden BA, Guyton JR, Kovacs AC, et al. Assessment and management of 
statin-associated muscle symptoms (SAMS): a clinical perspective from the 
National Lipid Association. J Clin Lipidol. 2022;S1933–2874(22)00245-
00248.
 48. Martin SS, Blaha MJ, Elshazly MB, et al. Friedewald-estimated versus direct-
ly measured low-density lipoprotein cholesterol and treatment implications. 
J Am Coll Cardiol. 2013;62:732–739. 49. Martin SS, Blaha MJ, Elshazly MB, et al. Comparison of a novel method vs 
the Friedewald equation for estimating low-density lipoprotein cholesterol 
levels from the standard lipid profile. JAMA. 2013;310:2061–2068.
 50. Whelton PK, Carey RM, Aronow WS, et al. 2017 ACC/AHA/AAPA/ABC/
ACPM/AGS/APhA/ASH/ASPC/NMA/PCNA guideline for the preven-
tion, detection, evaluation, and management of high blood pressure in 
adults: a report of the American College of Cardiology/American Heart As-
sociation Task Force on Clinical Practice Guidelines. i. 2018;71:e13–e115.
 51. Bonaca MP, Nault P, Giugliano RP, et al. Low-density lipoprotein cholesterol 
lowering with evolocumab and outcomes in patients with peripheral artery 
disease: insights from the FOURIER trial (Further Cardiovascular Outcomes 
Research With PCSK9 Inhibition in Subjects With Elevated Risk). Circulation. 
2018;137:338–350.
 52. Gencer B, Mach F, Murphy SA, et al. Efficacy of evolocumab on cardiovas-
cular outcomes in patients with recent myocardial infarction: a prespecified 
secondary analysis from the FOURIER trial. JAMA Cardiol. 2020;5:952–
9 57.
 53. Ridker PM, Rifai N, MacFadyen J, et al. Effects of randomized treatment 
with icosapent ethyl and a mineral oil comparator on interleukin-1beta, in-
terleukin-6, c-reactive protein, oxidized low-density lipoprotein cholesterol, 
homocysteine, lipoprotein(a), and lipoprotein-associated phospholipase A2: 
a REDUCE-IT biomarker substudy. Circulation. 2022;146:372–379.
 54. Alvarez Campano CG, Alvarez Campano CG, Macleod MJ, et al. Marine-
derived n-3 fatty acids therapy for stroke. Cochrane Database of Systematic 
Reviews. 2019;6:CD012815.
 55. Lin GA, Kazi D DS, Jih J, et al. Inclisiran and bempedoic acid for patients 
with heterozygous familial hypercholesteremia and for secondary preven-
tion of ASCVD: effectiveness and value; final evidence report. Institute for 
Clinical and Economic Review; 2021. Accessed March 1, 2022. https://
icer.org/wp-content/uploads/2020/10/ICER_High-Cholesterol_Final-
Evidence-Report_030221.pdf.
 56. Ginsberg HN, Elam MB, Lovato LC, et al. Accord Study Group. Effects 
of combination lipid therapy in type 2 diabetes mellitus. N Engl J Med. 
2010;362:1563–1574.
 57 . Das Pradhan A, Glynn RJ, Fruchart JC, et al. Triglyceride lowering with 
pemafibrate to reduce cardiovascular risk. N Engl J Med. 2022;387:1923–
1934.
 58. Gidding SS, Champagne MA, de Ferranti SD, et al. The agenda for familial 
hypercholesterolemia: a scientific statement from the American Heart As-
sociation. Circulation. 2015;132:2167–2192.
 59. Goldberg AC, Hopkins PN, Toth PP, et al. Familial hypercholesterolemia: 
screening, diagnosis and management of pediatric and adult patients: clini-
cal guidance from the National Lipid Association Expert Panel on Familial 
Hypercholesterolemia. J Clin Lipidol. 2011;5:S1–S8.
 60. US Food and Drug Administration. Drugs@FDA: FDA Approved Drug Prod-
ucts. Accessed January 8, 2021. https://www.accessdata.fda.gov/scripts/
cder/daf/.
 61. Pedersen TR, Faergeman O, Kastelein JJ, et al. High-dose atorvastatin vs 
usual-dose simvastatin for secondary prevention after myocardial infarction: 
the IDEAL study: a randomized controlled trial. JAMA. 2005;294:2437–
2445.
4.2.7 . Blood Pressure Management
 1. The Trials of Hypertension Prevention Collaborative Research Group. Ef-
fects of weight loss and sodium reduction intervention on blood pressure 
and hypertension incidence in overweight people with high-normal blood 
pressure. The Trials of Hypertension Prevention, phase II. Arch Intern Med. 
1997;157:657–667 .
 2. Appel LJ, Champagne CM, Harsha DW, et al. Effects of comprehensive life-
style modification on blood pressure control: main results of the PREMIER 
clinical trial. JAMA. 2003;289:2083–2093.
 3. Appel LJ, Moore T J, Obarzanek E, et al. A clinical trial of the effects of 
dietary patterns on blood pressure. DASH Collaborative Research Group. N 
Engl J Med. 1997;336:1117–1124.
 4. Cornelissen VA, Smart NA. Exercise training for blood pressure: a system-
atic review and meta-analysis. J Am Heart Assoc. 2013;2:e004473.
 5. Neter JE, Stam BE, Kok FJ, et al. Influence of weight reduction on blood 
pressure: a meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials. Hypertension. 
2003;42:878–884.
 6. Roerecke M, Kaczorowski J, Tobe SW, et al. The effect of a reduction in alco-
hol consumption on blood pressure: a systematic review and meta-analysis. 
Lancet Public Health. 2017;2:e108–e120.
 7 . Sacks FM, Svetkey LP, Vollmer WM, et al. Effects on blood pressure of 
reduced dietary sodium and the Dietary Approaches to Stop Hypertension 
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on November 12, 2025

CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINESAugust 29, 2023 Circulation. 2023;148:e9–e119. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000001168
Virani et al 2023 AHA/ACC/ACCP/ASPC/NLA/PCNA Chronic Coronary Disease Guideline e96(DASH) diet. DASH-Sodium Collaborative Research Group. N Engl J Med. 
2001;344:3–10.
 8. Whelton SP, Chin A, Xin X, et al. Effect of aerobic exercise on blood pres-
sure: a meta-analysis of randomized, controlled trials. Ann Intern Med. 
2002;136:493–503.
 9. Svetkey LP, Simons-Morton D, Vollmer WM, et al. Effects of dietary pat-
terns on blood pressure: subgroup analysis of the Dietary Approaches 
to Stop Hypertension (DASH) randomized clinical trial. Arch Intern Med. 
1999;159:285–293.
 10. Bohm M, Schumacher H, Teo KK, et al. Cardiovascular outcomes and 
achieved blood pressure in patients with and without diabetes at high car-
diovascular risk. Eur Heart J. 2019;40:2032–2043.
 11. Bundy JD, Li C, Stuchlik P, et al. Systolic blood pressure reduction and risk 
of cardiovascular disease and mortality: a systematic review and network 
meta-analysis. JAMA Cardiol. 2017;2:775–781.
 12. D'Anci KE, Tipton K, Hedden-Gross A, et al. Effect of intensive blood pres-
sure lowering on cardiovascular outcomes: a systematic review prepared for 
the 2020 U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs/U.S. Department of Defense 
Guidelines. Ann Intern Med. 2020;173:895–903.
 13. Wright JT Jr, Williamson JD, et al.; Sprint Research Group. A randomized 
trial of intensive versus standard blood-pressure control. N Engl J Med. 
2015;373:2103–2116.
 14. Sobieraj P, Lewandowski J, Sinski M, et al. Determination of optimal on-
treatment diastolic blood pressure range using automated measurements in 
subjects with cardiovascular disease-analysis of a SPRINT trial subpopula-
tion. J Clin Hypertens (Greenwich). 2019;21:911–918.
 15. Fox KM, Henderson JR, Bertrand ME, et al. The European trial on reduction 
of cardiac events with perindopril in stable coronary artery disease (EU-
ROPA). Eur Heart J. 1998;19(suppl J):J52–J55.
 16. Yusuf S, Sleight P, et al.; Heart Outcomes Prevention Evaluation Study Inves-
tigators. Effects of an angiotensin-converting-enzyme inhibitor, ramipril, on 
cardiovascular events in high-risk patients. N Engl J Med. 2000;342:145–
153.
 17 . Law MR, Morris JK, Wald NJ. Use of blood pressure lowering drugs in the 
prevention of cardiovascular disease: meta-analysis of 147 randomised tri-
als in the context of expectations from prospective epidemiological studies. 
BMJ. 2009;338:b1665.
 18. Poole-Wilson PA, Lubsen J, Kirwan BA, et al. Effect of long-acting nife-
dipine on mortality and cardiovascular morbidity in patients with stable an-
gina requiring treatment (ACTION trial): randomised controlled trial. Lancet. 
2004;364:849–857 .
 19. Whelton PK, Carey RM, Aronow WS, et al. 2017 ACC/AHA/AAPA/ABC/
ACPM/AGS/APhA/ASH/ASPC/NMA/PCNA guideline for the prevention, 
detection, evaluation, and management of high blood pressure in adults: a 
report of the American College of Cardiology/American Heart Association 
Task Force on Clinical Practice Guidelines. Hypertension. 2018;71:e13–
e115.
 20. Lewington S, Clarke R, Qizilbash N, et al. Age-specific relevance of usual 
blood pressure to vascular mortality: a meta-analysis of individual data for 
one million adults in 61 prospective studies. Lancet. 2002;360:1903–1913.
 21. Goldberger JJ, Subacius H, Marroquin OC, et al. One-year landmark analy-
sis of the effect of beta-blocker dose on survival after acute myocardial 
infarction. J Am Heart Assoc. 2021;10:e019017 .
 22. Carrick D, Haig C, Maznyczka AM, et al. Hypertension, microvascular pa-
thology, and prognosis after an acute myocardial infarction. Hypertension. 
2018;72:720–730.
 23. Ekelund LG, Olsson AG, Oro L, et al. Effects of the cardioselective beta-
adrenergic receptor blocking agent metoprolol in angina pectoris. Subacute 
study with exercise tests. Br Heart J. 1976;38:155–161.
 24. Freemantle N, Cleland J, Young P, et al. Beta blockade after myocar-
dial infarction: systematic review and meta regression analysis. BMJ. 
1999;318:1730–1737 .
 25. Mancia G, Fagard R, Narkiewicz K, et al. 2013 ESH/ESC guidelines for 
the management of arterial hypertension: the Task Force for the Man-
agement of Arterial Hypertension of the European Society of Hyperten-
sion (ESH) and of the European Society of Cardiology (ESC). Eur Heart J. 
2013;34:2159–2219.
 26. Fihn SD, Gardin JM, Abrams J, et al. 2012 ACCF/AHA/ACP/AATS/
PCNA/SCAI/STS guideline for the diagnosis and management of patients 
with stable ischemic heart disease: a report of the American College of 
Cardiology Foundation/American Heart Association Task Force on Practice 
Guidelines, and the American College of Physicians, American Association 
for Thoracic Surgery, Preventive Cardiovascular Nurses Association, Society 
for Cardiovascular Angiography and Interventions, and Society of Thoracic 
Surgeons. Circulation. 2012;126:e354–e471. 27 . Smith SC Jr, Benjamin EJ, Bonow RO, et al. AHA/ACCF secondary preven-
tion and risk reduction therapy for patients with coronary and other ath-
erosclerotic vascular disease: 2011 update: a guideline from the American 
Heart Association and American College of Cardiology Foundation. Circula-
tion. 2011;124:2458–2473.
 28. Fihn SD, Blankenship JC, Alexander KP, et al. 2014 ACC/AHA/AATS/
PCNA/SCAI/STS focused update of the guideline for the diagnosis and 
management of patients with stable ischemic heart disease: a report of the 
American College of Cardiology/American Heart Association Task Force 
on Practice Guidelines, and the American Association for Thoracic Surgery, 
Preventive Cardiovascular Nurses Association, Society for Cardiovascular 
Angiography and Interventions, and Society of Thoracic Surgeons. Circula-
tion. 2014;130:1749–1767 .
 29. Aburto NJ, Ziolkovska A, Hooper L, et al. Effect of lower sodium intake on 
health: systematic review and meta-analyses. BMJ. 2013;346:f1326.
 30. He FJ, Li J, Macgregor GA. Effect of longer term modest salt reduction 
on blood pressure: Cochrane systematic review and meta-analysis of ran-
domised trials. BMJ. 2013;346:f1325.
 31. Pepine CJ, Handberg EM, Cooper-DeHoff RM, et al. A calcium antagonist 
vs a non-calcium antagonist hypertension treatment strategy for patients 
with coronary artery disease. The International Verapamil-Trandolapril Study 
(INVEST): a randomized controlled trial. JAMA. 2003;290:2805–2816.
 32. Rosendorff C, Lackland DT, Allison M, et al. Treatment of hypertension in pa-
tients with coronary artery disease: a scientific statement from the American 
Heart Association, American College of Cardiology, and American Society 
of Hypertension. Hypertension. 2015;65:1372–1407 .
 33. Aronow WS, Fleg JL, Pepine CJ, et al. ACCF/AHA 2011 expert consensus 
document on hypertension in the elderly: a report of the American College of 
Cardiology Foundation Task Force on Clinical Expert Consensus Documents. 
Developed in collaboration with the American Academy of Neurology, Ameri-
can Geriatrics Society, American Society for Preventive Cardiology, Ameri-
can Society of Hypertension, American Society of Nephrology, Association 
of Black Cardiologists, and European Society of Hypertension. Circulation. 
2011;123:2434–2506.
 34. Carlberg B, Samuelsson O, Lindholm LH. Atenolol in hypertension: is it a 
wise choice?. Lancet. 2004;364:1684–1689.
 35. Whelton PK, He J, Cutler JA, et al. Effects of oral potassium on blood 
pressure. Meta-analysis of randomized controlled clinical trials. JAMA. 
1997;277:1624–1632.
 36. Carlson DJ, Dieberg G, Hess NC, et al. Isometric exercise training for blood 
pressure management: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Mayo Clin 
Proc. 2014;89:327–334.
 37 . Inder JD, Carlson DJ, Dieberg G, et al. Isometric exercise training for blood 
pressure management: a systematic review and meta-analysis to optimize 
benefit. Hypertens Res. 2016;39:88–94.
 38. NHLBI. DASH eating plan. Accessed June 1, 2022. https://www.nhlbi.nih.
gov/education/dash-eating-plan.
4.2.8. SGLT2 Inhibitors and GLP-1 Receptor Agonists
 1. Zinman B, Wanner C, Lachin JM, et al. Empagliflozin, cardiovascular out-
comes, and mortality in type 2 diabetes. N Engl J Med. 2015;373:2117–
2128.
 2. Wanner C, Inzucchi SE, Lachin JM, et al. Empagliflozin and progression 
of kidney disease in type 2 diabetes. N Engl J Med. 2016;375:323–
334.
 3. Neal B, Perkovic V, Mahaffey KW, et al. Canagliflozin and cardiovascular and 
renal events in type 2 diabetes. N Engl J Med. 2017;377:644–657 .
 4. Wiviott SD, Raz I, Bonaca MP, et al. Dapagliflozin and cardiovascular out-
comes in type 2 diabetes. N Engl J Med. 2018;380:347–357 .
 5. Cannon CP, Pratley R, Dagogo-Jack S, et al. Cardiovascular outcomes with 
ertugliflozin in type 2 diabetes. N Engl J Med. 2020;383:1425–1435.
 6. Kosiborod M, Cavender MA, Fu AZ, et al. Lower risk of heart failure and 
death in patients initiated on sodium-glucose cotransporter-2 inhibitors ver-
sus other glucose-lowering drugs: the CVD-REAL Study (Comparative Ef-
fectiveness of Cardiovascular Outcomes in New Users of Sodium-Glucose 
Cotransporter-2 Inhibitors). Circulation. 2017;136:249–259.
 7 . McGuire DK, Shih WJ, Cosentino F, et al. Association of SGL T2 inhibitors 
with cardiovascular and kidney outcomes in patients with type 2 diabetes: a 
meta-analysis. JAMA Cardiol. 2021;6:148–158.
 8. Fitchett D, Zinman B, Wanner C, et al. Heart failure outcomes with 
empagliflozin in patients with type 2 diabetes at high cardiovascu-
lar risk: results of the EMPA-REG OUTCOME(R) trial. Eur Heart J. 
2016;37:1526–1534.
 9. Marso SP, Daniels GH, Brown-Frandsen K, et al. Liraglutide and cardiovas-
cular outcomes in type 2 diabetes. N Engl J Med. 2016;375:311–322.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on November 12, 2025

CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINESCirculation. 2023;148:e9–e119. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000001168 August 29, 2023
Virani et al 2023 AHA/ACC/ACCP/ASPC/NLA/PCNA Chronic Coronary Disease Guideline e97 10. Marso SP, Bain SC, Consoli A, et al. Semaglutide and cardiovascular out-
comes in patients with type 2 diabetes. N Engl J Med. 2016;375:1834–
1844.
 11. Holman RR, Bethel MA, Mentz RJ, et al. Effects of once-weekly ex-
enatide on cardiovascular outcomes in type 2 diabetes. N Engl J Med. 
2017;377:1228–1239.
 12. Pfeffer MA, Claggett B, Diaz R, et al. Lixisenatide in patients with type 2 dia-
betes and acute coronary syndrome. N Engl J Med. 2015;373:2247–2257 .
 13. Hernandez AF, Green JB, Janmohamed S, et al. Albiglutide and cardiovas-
cular outcomes in patients with type 2 diabetes and cardiovascular disease 
(Harmony Outcomes): a double-blind, randomised placebo-controlled trial. 
Lancet. 2018;392:1519–1529.
 14. Gerstein HC, Colhoun HM, Dagenais GR, et al. Dulaglutide and cardiovas-
cular outcomes in type 2 diabetes (REWIND): a double-blind, randomised 
placebo-controlled trial. Lancet. 2019;394:121–130.
 15. Husain M, Birkenfeld AL, Donsmark M, et al. Oral semaglutide and car-
diovascular outcomes in patients with type 2 diabetes. N Engl J Med. 
2019;381:841–851.
 16. Kristensen SL, Rorth R, Jhund PS, et al. Cardiovascular, mortality, and kidney 
outcomes with GLP-1 receptor agonists in patients with type 2 diabetes: a 
systematic review and meta-analysis of cardiovascular outcome trials. Lan-
cet Diabetes Endocrinol. 2019;7:776–785.
 17 . Zelniker TA, Wiviott SD, Raz I, et al. Comparison of the effects of glucagon-
like peptide receptor agonists and sodium-glucose cotransporter 2 inhibi-
tors for prevention of major adverse cardiovascular and renal outcomes in 
type 2 diabetes mellitus. Circulation. 2019;139:2022–2031.
 18. Yoshida Y, Cheng X, Shao H, et al. A systematic review of cost-effectiveness 
of sodium-glucose cotransporter inhibitors for type 2 diabetes. Curr Diab 
Rep. 2020;20:12.
 19. Petrie MC, Verma S, Docherty KF, et al. Effect of dapagliflozin on worsening 
heart failure and cardiovascular death in patients with heart failure with and 
without diabetes. JAMA. 2020;323:1353–1368.
 20. McMurray JJV, Solomon SD, Inzucchi SE, et al. Dapagliflozin in patients with 
heart failure and reduced ejection fraction. N Engl J Med. 2019;381:1995–
2008.
 21. Packer M, Anker SD, Butler J, et al. Cardiovascular and renal outcomes with 
empagliflozin in heart failure. N Engl J Med. 2020;383:1413–1424.
 22. Zannad F, Ferreira JP, Pocock SJ, et al. SGL T2 inhibitors in patients with 
heart failure with reduced ejection fraction: a meta-analysis of the EMPER-
OR-Reduced and DAPA-HF trials. Lancet. 2020;396:819–829.
 23. Kosiborod MN, Jhund PS, Docherty KF, et al. Effects of dapagliflozin on 
symptoms, function, and quality of life in patients with heart failure and 
reduced ejection fraction: results from the DAPA-HF Trial. Circulation. 
2020;141:90–99.
 24. Butler J, Anker SD, Filippatos G, et al. Empagliflozin and health-related qual-
ity of life outcomes in patients with heart failure with reduced ejection frac-
tion: the EMPEROR-Reduced trial. Eur Heart J. 2021;42:1203–1212.
 25. Isaza N, Calvachi P, Raber I, et al. Cost-effectiveness of dapagliflozin for the 
treatment of heart failure with reduced ejection fraction. JAMA Netw Open. 
2021;4:e2114501.
 26. Parizo JT, Goldhaber-Fiebert JD, Salomon JA, et al. Cost-effectiveness of 
dapagliflozin for treatment of patients with heart failure with reduced ejec-
tion fraction. JAMA Cardiol. 2021;6:926–935.
 27 . Anker SD, Butler J, Filippatos G, et al. Empagliflozin in heart failure with a 
preserved ejection fraction. N Engl J Med. 2021;385:1451–1461.
 28. Solomon SD, McMurray JJV, Claggett B, et al. Dapagliflozin in heart fail-
ure with mildly reduced or preserved ejection fraction. N Engl J Med. 
2022;387:1089–1098.
 29. Nassif ME, Windsor SL, Borlaug BA, et al. The SGL T2 inhibitor dapagliflozin 
in heart failure with preserved ejection fraction: a multicenter randomized 
trial. Nat Med. 2021;27:1954–1960.
 30. Zheng J, Parizo JT, Spertus JA, et al. Cost-effectiveness of empagliflozin in 
patients with heart failure with preserved ejection fraction. JAMA Intern Med. 
2022
 31. Heidenreich PA, Bozkurt B, Aguilar D, et al. 2022 AHA/ACC/HFSA guide-
line for the management of heart failure: a report of the American College of 
Cardiology/American Heart Association Joint Committee on Clinical Prac-
tice Guidelines. Circulation. 2022;145:e895–e1032.
 32. Gaede P, Lund-Andersen H, Parving HH, et al. Effect of a multifactorial 
intervention on mortality in type 2 diabetes. N Engl J Med. 2008;358:580–
591.
 33. Sabatine MS, Leiter LA, Wiviott SD, et al. Cardiovascular safety and efficacy 
of the PCSK9 inhibitor evolocumab in patients with and without diabetes 
and the effect of evolocumab on glycaemia and risk of new-onset diabetes: a prespecified analysis of the FOURIER randomised controlled trial. Lancet 
Diabetes Endocrinol. 2017;5:941–950.
 34. Cavender MA, Steg PG, Smith SC Jr, et al. Impact of diabetes mellitus on 
hospitalization for heart failure, cardiovascular events, and death: outcomes 
at 4 years from the Reduction of Atherothrombosis for Continued Health 
(REACH) Registry. Circulation. 2015;132:923–931.
 35. Arnold SV, Inzucchi SE, Tang F, et al. Real-world use and modeled impact 
of glucose-lowering therapies evaluated in recent cardiovascular out-
comes trials: an NCDR(R) research to practice project. Eur J Prev Cardiol. 
2017;24:1637–1645.
 36. Arnold SV, de Lemos JA, Rosenson RS, et al. Use of guideline-recom-
mended risk-reduction strategies among patients with diabetes and ath-
erosclerotic cardiovascular disease: insights from Getting to an Improved 
Understanding of Low-Density Lipoprotein Cholesterol and Dyslipidemia 
Management (GOULD). Circulation. 2019;140:618–620.
 37 . Nassif ME, Kosiborod M. Are we ready to bell the cat? A call for cardiolo-
gists to embrace glucose-lowering therapies proven to improve cardiovas-
cular outcomes. Circulation. 2018;138:4–6.
 38. Vazquez-Benitez G, Desai JR, Xu S, et al. Preventable major cardiovascular 
events associated with uncontrolled glucose, blood pressure, and lipids and 
active smoking in adults with diabetes with and without cardiovascular dis-
ease: a contemporary analysis. Diabetes Care. 2015;38:905–912.
 39. Das SR, Everett BM, Birtcher KK, et al. 2020 Expert consensus decision 
pathway on novel therapies for cardiovascular risk reduction in patients with 
type 2 diabetes: a report of the American College of Cardiology Solution Set 
Oversight Committee. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2020;76:1117–1145.
 40. American Diabetes Association Professional Practice Committee. Glyce-
mic targets: standards of medical care in diabetes-2022. Diabetes Care. 
2021;45:S83–S96.
 41. American Diabetes Association Professional Practice Committee. Old-
er adults: standards of medical care in diabetes-2022. Diabetes Care. 
2021;45:S195–S207 .
 42. UK Prospective Diabetes Study (UKPDS) Group. Effect of intensive blood-
glucose control with metformin on complications in overweight patients with 
type 2 diabetes (UKPDS 34). Lancet. 1998;352:854–865.
 43. UK Prospective Diabetes Study (UKPDS) Group. Intensive blood-glucose 
control with sulphonylureas or insulin compared with conventional treatment 
and risk of complications in patients with type 2 diabetes (UKPDS 33). 
Lancet. 1998;352:837–853.
 44. Duckworth W, Abraira C, Moritz T, et al. Glucose control and vascular com-
plications in veterans with type 2 diabetes. N Engl J Med. 2009;360:129–
139.
 45. The ADVANCE Collaborative Group. Intensive blood glucose control and 
vascular outcomes in patients with type 2 diabetes. New Engl J Med. 
2008;358:2560–2572.
 46. Holman RR, Paul SK, Bethel MA, et al. 10-year follow-up of intensive glu-
cose control in type 2 diabetes. N Engl J Med. 2008;359:1577–1589.
 47 . Huang ES, Zhang Q, Gandra N, et al. The effect of comorbid illness and 
functional status on the expected benefits of intensive glucose control in 
older patients with type 2 diabetes: a decision analysis. Ann Intern Med. 
2008;149:11–19.
 48. LeRoith D, Biessels GJ, Braithwaite SS, et al. Treatment of diabetes in older 
adults: an Endocrine Society Clinical Practice Guideline. J Clin Endocrinol 
Metab. 2019;104:1520–1574.
 49. Cai X, Ji L, Chen Y, et al. Comparisons of weight changes between sodium-
glucose cotransporter 2 inhibitors treatment and glucagon-like peptide-1 
analogs treatment in type 2 diabetes patients: a meta-analysis. J Diabetes 
Investig. 2017;8:510–517 .
 50. Davies MJ, Aronne LJ, Caterson ID, et al. Liraglutide and cardiovascular out-
comes in adults with overweight or obesity: a post hoc analysis from SCALE 
randomized controlled trials. Diabetes Obes Metab. 2018;20:734–739.
 51. Huang M, Wei R, Wang Y, et al. Protective effect of glucagon-like peptide-1 
agents on reperfusion injury for acute myocardial infarction: a meta-analysis 
of randomized controlled trials. Ann Med. 2017;49:552–561.
 52. Ludvik B, Frias JP, Tinahones FJ, et al. Dulaglutide as add-on therapy to 
SGL T2 inhibitors in patients with inadequately controlled type 2 diabetes 
(AWARD-10): a 24-week, randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled 
trial. Lancet Diabetes Endocrinol. 2018;6:370–381.
 53. Guo M, Gu J, Teng F, et al. The efficacy and safety of combinations of 
SGL T2 inhibitors and GLP-1 receptor agonists in the treatment of type 2 
diabetes or obese adults: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Endocrine. 
2020;67:294–304.
 54. Mantsiou C, Karagiannis T, Kakotrichi P, et al. Glucagon-like peptide-1 
receptor agonists and sodium-glucose co-transporter-2 inhibitors as  
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on November 12, 2025

CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINESAugust 29, 2023 Circulation. 2023;148:e9–e119. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000001168
Virani et al 2023 AHA/ACC/ACCP/ASPC/NLA/PCNA Chronic Coronary Disease Guideline e98combination therapy for type 2 diabetes: a systematic review and meta-
analysis. Diabetes Obes Metab. 2020;22:1857–1868.
4.2.9. Weight Management
 1. Bogers RP, Bemelmans WJ, Hoogenveen RT, et al. Association of over-
weight with increased risk of coronary heart disease partly independent of 
blood pressure and cholesterol levels: a meta-analysis of 21 cohort studies 
including more than 300 000 persons. Arch Intern Med. 2007;167:1720–
1728.
 2. Calle EE, Thun MJ, Petrelli JM, et al. Body-mass index and mortality in a 
prospective cohort of U.S. adults. N Engl J Med. 1999;341:1097–1105.
 3. Arnlov J, Ingelsson E, Sundstrom J, et al. Impact of body mass index and 
the metabolic syndrome on the risk of cardiovascular disease and death in 
middle-aged men. Circulation. 2010;121:230–236.
 4. Jacobs EJ, Newton CC, Wang Y, et al. Waist circumference and all-cause 
mortality in a large US cohort. Arch Intern Med. 2010;170:1293–1301.
 5. McTigue K, Larson JC, Valoski A, et al. Mortality and cardiac and vascular 
outcomes in extremely obese women. JAMA. 2006;296:79–86.
 6. Khan SS, Ning H, Wilkins JT, et al. Association of body mass index with 
lifetime risk of cardiovascular disease and compression of morbidity. JAMA 
Cardiol. 2018;3:280–287 .
 7 . LeBlanc ES, Patnode CD, Webber EM, et al. Behavioral and pharmaco-
therapy weight loss interventions to prevent obesity-related morbidity and 
mortality in adults: updated evidence report and systematic review for the 
US Preventive Services Task Force. JAMA. 2018;320:1172–1191.
 8. Wadden TA, Butryn ML, Hong PS, et al. Behavioral treatment of obesity in 
patients encountered in primary care settings: a systematic review. JAMA. 
2014;312:1779–1791.
 9. Sui X, LaMonte MJ, Laditka JN, et al. Cardiorespiratory fitness and adiposity 
as mortality predictors in older adults. JAMA. 2007;298:2507–2516.
 10. Fogelholm M. Physical activity, fitness and fatness: relations to mortal-
ity, morbidity and disease risk factors. A systematic review. Obes Rev. 
2010;11:202–221.
 11. Wilding JPH, Batterham RL, Calanna S, et al. Once-weekly semaglutide in 
adults with overweight or obesity. N Engl J Med. 2021;384:989.
 12. Pi-Sunyer X, Astrup A, Fujioka K, et al. A randomized, controlled trial of 3.0 
mg of liraglutide in weight management. N Engl J Med. 2015;373:11–22.
 13. Rubino DM, Greenway FL, Khalid U, et al. Effect of weekly subcutaneous 
semaglutide vs daily liraglutide on body weight in adults with overweight 
or obesity without diabetes: the STEP 8 randomized clinical trial. JAMA. 
2022;327:138–150.
 14. O'Neil PM, Birkenfeld AL, McGowan B, et al. Efficacy and safety of sema-
glutide compared with liraglutide and placebo for weight loss in patients 
with obesity: a randomised, double-blind, placebo and active controlled, 
dose-ranging, phase 2 trial. Lancet. 2018;392:637–649.
 15. Lopez-Jimenez F, Bhatia S, Collazo-Clavell ML, et al. Safety and efficacy of 
bariatric surgery in patients with coronary artery disease. Mayo Clin Proc. 
2005;80:1157–1162.
 16. Sjostrom L, Peltonen M, Jacobson P, et al. Bariatric surgery and long-term 
cardiovascular events. JAMA. 2012;307:56–65.
 17 . Doumouras AG, Wong JA, Paterson JM, et al. Bariatric surgery and cardio-
vascular outcomes in patients with obesity and cardiovascular disease: a 
population-based retrospective cohort study. Circulation. 2021;143:1468–
1480.
 18. Naslund E, Stenberg E, Hofmann R, et al. Association of metabolic surgery 
with major adverse cardiovascular outcomes in patients with previous myo-
cardial infarction and severe obesity: a nationwide cohort study. Circulation. 
2021;143:1458–1467 .
 19. James WP, Caterson ID, Coutinho W, et al. Effect of sibutramine on car-
diovascular outcomes in overweight and obese subjects. N Engl J Med. 
2010;363:905–917 .
 20. Powell-Wiley TM, Poirier P, Burke LE, et al. Obesity and cardiovascular dis-
ease: a scientific statement from the American Heart Association. Circula-
tion. 2021;143:e984–e1010.
 21. Berenson GS, Srinivasan SR, Bao W, et al. Association between multiple 
cardiovascular risk factors and atherosclerosis in children and young adults. 
The Bogalusa Heart Study. N Engl J Med. 1998;338:1650–1656.
 22. Kenchaiah S, Evans JC, Levy D, et al. Obesity and the risk of heart failure. N 
Engl J Med. 2002;347:305–313.
 23. McGill HC Jr, McMahan CA, Herderick EE, et al. Obesity accelerates 
the progression of coronary atherosclerosis in young men. Circulation. 
2002;105:2712–2718.
 24. Jensen MD, Ryan DH, Apovian CM, et al. 2013 AHA/ACC/TOS guideline 
for the management of overweight and obesity in adults: a report of the 
American College of Cardiology/American Heart Association Task Force on Practice Guidelines and The Obesity Society. Circulation. 2014;129:S102–
S138.
 25. Coutinho T, Goel K, Correa de Sa D, et al. Central obesity and survival in 
subjects with coronary artery disease: a systematic review of the literature 
and collaborative analysis with individual subject data. J Am Coll Cardiol. 
2011;57:1877–1886.
 26. Coutinho T, Goel K, Correa de Sa D, et al. Combining body mass index with 
measures of central obesity in the assessment of mortality in subjects with 
coronary disease: role of “normal weight central obesity”. J Am Coll Cardiol. 
2013;61:553–560.
 27 . Balkau B, Deanfield JE, Despres JP, et al. International Day for the Evalu-
ation of Abdominal Obesity (IDEA): a study of waist circumference, cardio-
vascular disease, and diabetes mellitus in 168 000 primary care patients in 
63 countries. Circulation. 2007;116:1942–1951.
 28. Nissen SE, Wolski KE, Prcela L, et al. Effect of naltrexone-bupropion 
on major adverse cardiovascular events in overweight and obese pa-
tients with cardiovascular risk factors: a randomized clinical trial. JAMA. 
2016;315:990–1004.
 29. Marso SP, Daniels GH, Brown-Frandsen K, et al. Liraglutide and cardiovas-
cular outcomes in type 2 diabetes. N Engl J Med. 2016;375:311–322.
 30. Marso SP, Bain SC, Consoli A, et al. Semaglutide and cardiovascular out-
comes in patients with type 2 diabetes. N Engl J Med. 2016;375:1834–
1844.
 31. Jastreboff AM, Aronne LJ, Ahmad NN, et al. Tirzepatide once weekly for the 
treatment of obesity. N Engl J Med. 2022;387:205–216.
 32. Carlsson LM, Peltonen M, Ahlin S, et al. Bariatric surgery and prevention of 
type 2 diabetes in Swedish obese subjects. N Engl J Med. 2012;367:695–
704.
 33. Klein S, Fontana L, Young VL, et al. Absence of an effect of liposuction on 
insulin action and risk factors for coronary heart disease. N Engl J Med. 
2004;350:2549–2557 .
 34. Schauer PR, Bhatt DL, Kirwan JP, et al. Bariatric surgery versus inten-
sive medical therapy for diabetes - 5-year outcomes. N Engl J Med. 
2017;376:641–651.
 35. Questions and answers about FDA's initiative against contaminated weight 
loss products. 2021. Accessed March 1, 2022. https://www.fda.gov/drugs/
questions-answers/questions-and-answers-about-fdas-initiative-against-
contaminated-weight-loss-products.
4.2.10. Cardiac Rehabilitation
 1. Maron DJ, Hochman JS, Reynolds HR, et al. Initial invasive or conservative 
strategy for stable coronary disease. N Engl J Med. 2020;382:1395–1407 .
 2. Saeidifard F, Wang Y, Medina-Inojosa JR, et al. Multicomponent cardiac re-
habilitation and cardiovascular outcomes in patients with stable angina: a 
systematic review and meta-analysis. Mayo Clin Proc Innov Qual Outcomes. 
2021;5:727–741.
 3. Boden WE, O'Rourke RA, Teo KK, et al. Optimal medical therapy with or 
without PCI for stable coronary disease. N Engl J Med. 2007;356:1503–
1516.
 4. Beatty AL, Brown TM, Corbett M, et al. Million Hearts cardiac rehabilitation 
think tank: accelerating new care models. Circ Cardiovasc Qual Outcomes. 
2021;14:e008215.
 5. Franklin BA, Thompson PD, Al-Zaiti SS, et al. Exercise-related acute cardiovas-
cular events and potential deleterious adaptations following long-term exercise 
training: placing the risks into perspective-an update: a scientific statement 
from the American Heart Association. Circulation. 2020;141:e705–e736.
 6. Radford NB, DeFina LF, Barlow CE, et al. Progression of CAC score and risk 
of incident CVD. J Am Coll Cardiol Img. 2016;9:1420–1429.
 7 . Newman W, Parry-Williams G, Wiles J, et al. Risk of atrial fibrillation 
in athletes: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Br J Sports Med. 
2021;55:1233–1238.
 8. Anderson L, Nguyen TT, Dall CH, et al. Exercise-based cardiac reha-
bilitation in heart transplant recipients. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 
2017;4:CD012264.
 9. Nytroen K, Rolid K, Andreassen AK, et al. Effect of high-intensity interval 
training in de novo heart transplant recipients in Scandinavia. Circulation. 
2019;139:2198–2211.
 10. Nytroen K, Rustad LA, Aukrust P, et al. High-intensity interval training im-
proves peak oxygen uptake and muscular exercise capacity in heart trans-
plant recipients. Am J Transplant. 2012;12:3134–3142.
 11. Nytroen K, Rustad LA, Erikstad I, et al. Effect of high-intensity interval train-
ing on progression of cardiac allograft vasculopathy. J Heart Lung Trans-
plant. 2013;32:1073–1080.
 12. Rafique M, Solberg OG, Gullestad L, et al. A randomized clinical study us-
ing optical coherence tomography to evaluate the short-term effects of  
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on November 12, 2025

CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINESCirculation. 2023;148:e9–e119. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000001168 August 29, 2023
Virani et al 2023 AHA/ACC/ACCP/ASPC/NLA/PCNA Chronic Coronary Disease Guideline e99high-intensity interval training on cardiac allograft vasculopathy: a HITTS 
substudy. Clin Transplant. 2022;36:e14488.
 13. Asleh R, Briasoulis A, Pereira NL, et al. Timing of 3-hydroxy-3-methylglu-
taryl-coenzyme A reductase inhibitor initiation and allograft vasculopathy 
progression and outcomes in heart transplant recipients. ESC Heart Fail. 
2018;5:1118–1129.
 14. Chou AY, Prakash R, Rajala J, et al. The first dedicated cardiac rehabilitation 
program for patients with spontaneous coronary artery dissection: descrip-
tion and initial results. Can J Cardiol. 2016;32:554–560.
 15. Krittanawong C, Tweet MS, Hayes SE, et al. Usefulness of cardiac re-
habilitation after spontaneous coronary artery dissection. Am J Cardiol. 
2016;117:1604–1609.
 16. Hayes SN, Kim ESH, Saw J, et al. Spontaneous coronary artery dissection: 
current state of the science: a scientific statement from the American Heart 
Association. Circulation. 2018;137:e523–e557 .
 17 . Imran H, Gaw A, Stabile L, et al. Safety and outcomes of cardiac rehabilita-
tion for patients with spontaneous coronary artery dissection. J Rehabil Med 
Clin Commun. 2018;1:1000001.
 18. Balady GJ, Williams MA, Ades PA, et al. Core components of cardiac rehabil-
itation/secondary prevention programs: 2007 update: a scientific statement 
from the American Heart Association Exercise, Cardiac Rehabilitation, and 
Prevention Committee, the Council on Clinical Cardiology; the Councils on 
Cardiovascular Nursing, Epidemiology and Prevention, and Nutrition, Physi-
cal Activity, and Metabolism; and the American Association of Cardiovascu-
lar and Pulmonary Rehabilitation. Circulation. 2007;115:2675–2682.
 19. Taylor RS, Dibben G, Faulkner J, et al. Exercise-based cardiac reha-
bilitation for coronary heart disease. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 
2021;11:CD001800.
 20. Taylor RS, Dalal HM, McDonagh ST J. The role of cardiac rehabilitation in 
improving cardiovascular outcomes. Nat Rev Cardiol. 2022;19:180–194.
 21. Taylor RS, Abraham LN, Sibilitz KL, et al. Exercise-based cardiac reha-
bilitation for adults after heart valve surgery. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 
2021;5:CD010876.
 22. Taylor JL, Keating SE, Holland DJ, et al. High intensity interval training does 
not result in short- or long-term dietary compensation in cardiac rehabilita-
tion: results from the FITR heart study. Appetite. 2021;158:105021.
 23. Taylor JL, Holland DJ, Keating SE, et al. Adherence to high-intensity interval 
training in cardiac rehabilitation: a review and recommendations. J Cardio-
pulm Rehabil Prev. 2021;41:61–77 .
 24. Ritchey MD, Maresh S, McNeely J, et al. Tracking cardiac rehabilitation par-
ticipation and completion among Medicare beneficiaries to inform the efforts 
of a national initiative. Circ Cardiovasc Qual Outcomes. 2020;13:e005902.
 25. Varnfield M, Karunanithi M, Lee CK, et al. Smartphone-based home care 
model improved use of cardiac rehabilitation in postmyocardial infarction 
patients: results from a randomised controlled trial. Heart. 2014;100:1770–
1779.
 26. Anderson L, Sharp GA, Norton RJ, et al. Home-based versus centre-based 
cardiac rehabilitation. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2017;6:CD007130.
 27 . Huang K, Liu W, He D, et al. Telehealth interventions versus center-based 
cardiac rehabilitation of coronary artery disease: a systematic review and 
meta-analysis. Eur J Prev Cardiol. 2015;22:959–971.
 28. Thomas RJ, Beatty AL, Beckie TM, et al. Home-based cardiac rehabilitation: 
a scientific statement from the American Association of Cardiovascular and 
Pulmonary Rehabilitation, the American Heart Association, and the Ameri-
can College of Cardiology. Circulation. 2019;140:e69–e89.
 29. Nkonde-Price C, Reynolds K, Najem M, et al. Comparison of home-based vs 
center-based cardiac rehabilitation in hospitalization, medication adherence, 
and risk factor control among patients with cardiovascular disease. JAMA 
Netw Open. 2022;5:e2228720.
 30. Hamm LF, Sanderson BK, Ades PA, et al. Core competencies for cardiac 
rehabilitation/secondary prevention professionals: 2010 update: position 
statement of the American Association of Cardiovascular and Pulmonary 
Rehabilitation. J Cardiopulm Rehabil Prev. 2011;31:2–10.
 31. King M, Bittner V, Josephson R, et al. Medical director responsibilities for 
outpatient cardiac rehabilitation/secondary prevention programs: 2012 
update: a statement for health care professionals from the American As-
sociation of Cardiovascular and Pulmonary Rehabilitation and the American 
Heart Association. Circulation. 2012;126:2535–2543.
 32. Hammill BG, Curtis LH, Schulman KA, et al. Relationship between cardiac 
rehabilitation and long-term risks of death and myocardial infarction among 
elderly Medicare beneficiaries. Circulation. 2010;121:63–70.
 33. Medina-Inojosa JR, Grace SL, Supervia M, et al. Dose of cardiac rehabilita-
tion to reduce mortality and morbidity: a population-based study. J Am Heart 
Assoc. 2021;10:e021356. 34. Alter DA, Yu B, Bajaj RR, et al. Relationship between cardiac rehabilitation 
participation and health service expenditures within a universal health care 
system. Mayo Clin Proc. 2017;s0025–s6196(17)30075-30077 .
 35. Edwards K, Jones N, Newton J, et al. The cost-effectiveness of exercise-
based cardiac rehabilitation: a systematic review of the characteristics and 
methodological quality of published literature. Health Econ Rev. 2017;7:37 .
 36. Takura T, Ebata-Kogure N, Goto Y, et al. Cost-effectiveness of cardiac re-
habilitation in patients with coronary artery disease: a meta-analysis. Cardiol 
Res Pract. 2019;2019:1840894.
 37 . Giannuzzi P, Temporelli PL, Marchioli R, et al. Global secondary prevention 
strategies to limit event recurrence after myocardial infarction: results of the 
GOSPEL study, a multicenter, randomized controlled trial from the Italian 
Cardiac Rehabilitation Network. Arch Intern Med. 2008;168:2194–2204.
 38. Heidenreich PA, Bozkurt B, Aguilar D, et al. 2022 AHA/ACC/HFSA guide-
line for the management of heart failure: a report of the American College of 
Cardiology/American Heart Association Joint Committee on Clinical Prac-
tice Guidelines. Circulation. 2022;145:e895–e1032.
 39. Dibben G, Faulkner J, Oldridge N, et al. Exercise-based cardiac re-
habilitation for coronary heart disease. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 
2021;11:CD001800.
 40. Long L, Anderson L, Dewhirst AM, et al. Exercise-based cardiac reha-
bilitation for adults with stable angina. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 
2018;2:CD012786.
 41. Dibben GO, Dalal HM, Taylor RS, et al. Cardiac rehabilitation and physi-
cal activity: systematic review and meta-analysis. Heart. 2018;104:1394–
1402.
 42. Sumner J, Harrison A, Doherty P. The effectiveness of modern cardiac 
rehabilitation: a systematic review of recent observational studies in non-
attenders versus attenders. PLoS One. 2017;12:e0177658.
 43. Dunlay SM, Pack QR, Thomas RJ, et al. Participation in cardiac rehabilita-
tion, readmissions, and death after acute myocardial infarction. Am J Med. 
2014;127:538–546.
 44. Oldridge N, Taylor RS. Cost-effectiveness of exercise therapy in patients 
with coronary heart disease, chronic heart failure and associated risk fac-
tors: a systematic review of economic evaluations of randomized clinical 
trials. Eur J Prev Cardiol. 2020;27:1045–1055.
 45. Oldridge N, Pakosh M, Grace SL. A systematic review of recent cardiac 
rehabilitation meta-analyses in patients with coronary heart disease or heart 
failure. Future Cardiol. 2019;15:227–249.
 46. Yardley M, Gullestad L, Bendz B, et al. Long-term effects of high-inten-
sity interval training in heart transplant recipients: a 5-year follow-up 
study of a randomized controlled trial. Clin Transplant. 2017;31: doi: 
10.1111/ctr.12868
 47 . Rolid K, Andreassen AK, Yardley M, et al. Long-term effects of high-intensity 
training vs moderate intensity training in heart transplant recipients: a 3-year 
follow-up study of the randomized-controlled HITTS study. Am J Transplant. 
2020;20:3538–3549.
 48. Rosenbaum AN, Kremers WK, Schirger JA, et al. Association between early 
cardiac rehabilitation and long-term survival in cardiac transplant recipients. 
Mayo Clin Proc. 2016;91:149–156.
4.2.11. Physical Activity
 1. Dibben GO, Dalal HM, Taylor RS, et al. Cardiac rehabilitation and physi-
cal activity: systematic review and meta-analysis. Heart. 2018;104:1394–
1402.
 2. Hambrecht R, Walther C, Mobius-Winkler S, et al. Percutaneous coronary 
angioplasty compared with exercise training in patients with stable coronary 
artery disease: a randomized trial. Circulation. 2004;109:1371–1378.
 3. Huang K, Liu W, He D, et al. Telehealth interventions versus center-based 
cardiac rehabilitation of coronary artery disease: a systematic review and 
meta-analysis. Eur J Prev Cardiol. 2015;22:959–971.
 4. Cornelissen VA, Fagard RH, Coeckelberghs E, et al. Impact of resistance 
training on blood pressure and other cardiovascular risk factors: a meta-
analysis of randomized, controlled trials. Hypertension. 2011;58:950–958.
 5. Fan Y, Yu M, Li J, et al. Efficacy and safety of resistance training for coronary 
heart disease rehabilitation: a systematic review of randomized controlled 
trials. Front Cardiovasc Med. 2021;8:754794.
 6. Marzolini S, Oh PI, Brooks D. Effect of combined aerobic and resistance 
training versus aerobic training alone in individuals with coronary artery dis-
ease: a meta-analysis. Eur J Prev Cardiol. 2012;19:81–94.
 7 . Geidl W, Schlesinger S, Mino E, et al. Dose-response relationship between 
physical activity and mortality in adults with noncommunicable diseases: a 
systematic review and meta-analysis of prospective observational studies. 
Int J Behav Nutr Phys Act. 2020;17:109.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on November 12, 2025

CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINESAugust 29, 2023 Circulation. 2023;148:e9–e119. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000001168
Virani et al 2023 AHA/ACC/ACCP/ASPC/NLA/PCNA Chronic Coronary Disease Guideline e100 8. Hall KS, Hyde ET, Bassett DR, et al. Systematic review of the prospective 
association of daily step counts with risk of mortality, cardiovascular disease, 
and dysglycemia. Int J Behav Nutr Phys Act. 2020;17:78.
 9. Nieste I, Franssen WMA, Spaas J, et al. Lifestyle interventions to reduce 
sedentary behaviour in clinical populations: a systematic review and meta-
analysis of different strategies and effects on cardiometabolic health. Prev 
Med. 2021;148:106593.
 10. McCarthy M, Edwardson CL, Davies MJ, et al. Breaking up sedentary 
time with seated upper body activity can regulate metabolic health in 
obese high-risk adults: a randomized crossover trial. Diabetes Obes Metab. 
2017;19:1732–1739.
 11. Yates T, Edwardson CL, Celis-Morales C, et al. Metabolic effects of breaking 
prolonged sitting with standing or light walking in older South Asians and 
White Europeans: a randomized acute study. J Gerontol A Biol Sci Med Sci. 
2020;75:139–146.
 12. Franklin BA, Thompson PD, Al-Zaiti SS, et al. Exercise-related acute 
cardiovascular events and potential deleterious adaptations following 
long-term exercise training: placing the risks into perspective-an update: 
a scientific statement from the American Heart Association. Circulation. 
2020;141:e705–e736.
 13. Dibben G, Faulkner J, Oldridge N, et al. Exercise-based cardiac re-
habilitation for coronary heart disease. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 
2021;11:CD001800.
 14. Sumner J, Harrison A, Doherty P. The effectiveness of modern cardiac 
rehabilitation: a systematic review of recent observational studies in non-
attenders versus attenders. PLoS One. 2017;12:e0177658.
 15. Gomes Neto M, Duraes AR, Conceicao LSR, et al. High intensity interval 
training versus moderate intensity continuous training on exercise capacity 
and quality of life in patients with heart failure with reduced ejection fraction: 
a systematic review and meta-analysis. Int J Cardiol. 2018;261:134–141.
 16. Wewege MA, Ahn D, Yu J, et al. High-intensity interval training for patients 
with cardiovascular disease-is it safe? a systematic review. J Am Heart As-
soc. 2018;7:e009305.
 17 . Piercy KL, Troiano RP, Ballard RM, et al. The physical activity guidelines for 
Americans. JAMA. 2018;320:2020–2028.
 18. Xanthos PD, Gordon BA, Kingsley MI. Implementing resistance training in 
the rehabilitation of coronary heart disease: a systematic review and meta-
analysis. Int J Cardiol. 2017;230:493–508.
 19. Saeidifard F, Medina-Inojosa JR, West CP, et al. The association of resis-
tance training with mortality: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Eur J 
Prev Cardiol. 2019;26:1647–1665.
 20. Ekblom-Bak E, Ekblom B, Vikstrom M, et al. The importance of non-exercise 
physical activity for cardiovascular health and longevity. Br J Sports Med. 
2014;48:233–238.
 21. Koepp GA, Moore G, Levine JA. An under-the-table leg-movement appara-
tus and changes in energy expenditure. Front Physiol. 2017;8:318.
 22. van der Berg JD, Stehouwer CDA, Bosma H, et al. Dynamic sitting: measure-
ment and associations with metabolic health. J Sports Sci. 2019;37:1746–
1754.
 23. Whittaker AC, Eves FF, Carroll D, et al. Daily stair climbing is associ-
ated with decreased risk for the metabolic syndrome. BMC Public Health. 
2021;21:923.
 24. Stamatakis E, Gale J, Bauman A, et al. Sitting time, physical activity, and risk 
of mortality in adults. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2019;73:2062–2072.
 25. Bjork Petersen C, Bauman A, Gronbaek M, et al. Total sitting time and risk 
of myocardial infarction, coronary heart disease and all-cause mortality in a 
prospective cohort of Danish adults. Int J Behav Nutr Phys Act. 2014;11:13.
 26. Chaudhry UAR, Wahlich C, Fortescue R, et al. The effects of step-count 
monitoring interventions on physical activity: systematic review and meta-
analysis of community-based randomised controlled trials in adults. Int J 
Behav Nutr Phys Act. 2020;17:129.
4.2.12. Environmental Exposures
 1. McGuinn LA, Ward-Caviness CK, Neas LM, et al. Association between 
satellite-based estimates of long-term PM2.5 exposure and coronary artery 
disease. Environ Res. 2016;145:9–17 .
 2. Li J, Liu F, Liang F, et al. Long-term effects of high exposure to ambient fine 
particulate matter on coronary heart disease incidence: a population-based 
Chinese cohort study. Environ Sci Technol. 2020;54:6812–6821.
 3. Maitre A, Bonneterre V, Huillard L, et al. Impact of urban atmospheric pollu-
tion on coronary disease. Eur Heart J. 2006;27:2275–2284.
 4. Kaufman JD, Adar SD, Barr RG, et al. Association between air pollution 
and coronary artery calcification within six metropolitan areas in the USA 
(the Multi-Ethnic Study of Atherosclerosis and Air Pollution): a longitudinal 
cohort study. Lancet. 2016;388:696–704. 5. Yusuf S, Joseph P, Rangarajan S, et al. Modifiable risk factors, cardiovas-
cular disease, and mortality in 155 722 individuals from 21 high-income, 
middle-income, and low-income countries (PURE): a prospective cohort 
study. Lancet. 2020;395:795–808.
 6. Liu C, Chen R, Sera F, et al. Ambient particulate air pollution and daily mor-
tality in 652 cities. N Engl J Med. 2019;381:705–715.
 7 . Shah AS, Lee KK, McAllister DA, et al. Short term exposure to air pollution 
and stroke: systematic review and meta-analysis. BMJ. 2015;350:h1295.
 8. Cheng J, Xu Z, Bambrick H, et al. Cardiorespiratory effects of heatwaves: 
a systematic review and meta-analysis of global epidemiological evidence. 
Environ Res. 2019;177:108610.
 9. Layton JB, Li W, Yuan J, et al. Heatwaves, medications, and heat-related 
hospitalization in older Medicare beneficiaries with chronic conditions. PLoS 
One. 2020;15:e0243665.
 10. Saucy A, Ragettli MS, Vienneau D, et al. The role of extreme temperature in 
cause-specific acute cardiovascular mortality in Switzerland: a case-cross-
over study. Sci Total Environ. 2021;790:147958.
 11. Cascio WE. Wildland fire smoke and human health. Sci Total Environ. 
2018;624:586–595.
 12. Reid CE, Brauer M, Johnston FH, et al. Critical review of health impacts of 
wildfire smoke exposure. Environ Health Perspect. 2016;124:1334–1343.
 13. Heaviside C, Macintyre H, Vardoulakis S. The urban heat island: implications 
for health in a changing environment. Curr Environ Health Rep. 2017;4:296–
305.
 14. Salas RN. The climate crisis and clinical practice. N Engl J Med. 
2020;382:589–591.
 15. Eriksson HP, Andersson E, Schioler L, et al. Longitudinal study of occupa-
tional noise exposure and joint effects with job strain and risk for coronary 
heart disease and stroke in Swedish men. BMJ Open. 2018;8:e019160.
 16. Vienneau D, Schindler C, Perez L, et al. The relationship between transpor-
tation noise exposure and ischemic heart disease: a meta-analysis. Environ 
Res. 2015;138:372–380.
 17 . Hsu A, Sheriff G, Chakraborty T, et al. Publisher correction: disproportionate 
exposure to urban heat island intensity across major US cities. Nat Commun. 
2021;12:4104.
 18. Brauer M, Casadei B, Harrington RA, et al. Taking a stand against air pol-
lution-the impact on cardiovascular disease: a joint opinion from the World 
Heart Federation, American College of Cardiology, American Heart Associ-
ation, and the European Society of Cardiology. Circulation. 2021;143:e800–
e804.
 19. Rajagopalan S, Brauer M, Bhatnagar A, et al. Personal-level protective ac-
tions against particulate matter air pollution exposure: a scientific statement 
from the American Heart Association. Circulation. 2020;142:e411–e431.
 20. Bell ML, Dominici F, Samet JM. A meta-analysis of time-series studies of 
ozone and mortality with comparison to the national morbidity, mortality, and 
air pollution study. Epidemiology. 2005;16:436–445.
 21. Environmental Protection Agency. AirNow.gov. Accessed March 1, 2022. 
https://www.airnow.gov/.
 22. NEPHTN. Data from: National Environmental Public Health Tracking Net-
work. Chronic conditions and wildfire smoke. 2022. CDC.
4.3.1. Antiplatelet Therapy and Oral Anticoagulants
 1. Antithrombotic Trialists' Collaboration. Collaborative meta-analysis of ran-
domised trials of antiplatelet therapy for prevention of death, myocardial 
infarction, and stroke in high risk patients. BMJ. 2002;324:71–86.
 2. Baigent C, Blackwell L, Collins R, et al. Aspirin in the primary and second-
ary prevention of vascular disease: collaborative meta-analysis of individual 
participant data from randomised trials. Lancet. 2009;373:1849–1860.
 3. Jones WS, Mulder H, Wruck LM, et al. Comparative effectiveness of aspirin 
dosing in cardiovascular disease. N Engl J Med. 2021;384:1981–1990.
 4. Palmerini T, Benedetto U, Bacchi-Reggiani L, et al. Mortality in patients 
treated with extended duration dual antiplatelet therapy after drug-eluting 
stent implantation: a pairwise and Bayesian network meta-analysis of ran-
domised trials. Lancet. 2015;385:2371–2382.
 5. Colombo A, Chieffo A, Frasheri A, et al. Second-generation drug-eluting 
stent implantation followed by 6- versus 12-month dual antiplatelet therapy: 
the SECURITY randomized clinical trial. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2014;64:2086–
2 0 97.
 6. Gwon HC, Hahn JY, Park KW, et al. Six-month versus 12-month dual an-
tiplatelet therapy after implantation of drug-eluting stents: the Efficacy of 
Xience/Promus Versus Cypher to Reduce Late Loss After Stenting (EX -
CELLENT) randomized, multicenter study. Circulation. 2012;125:505–513.
 7 . Schulz-Schupke S, Byrne RA, ten Berg JM, et al. ISAR-SAFE: a random-
ized, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial of 6 vs. 12 months of clopidogrel 
therapy after drug-eluting stenting. Eur Heart J. 2015;36:1252–1263.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on November 12, 2025

CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINESCirculation. 2023;148:e9–e119. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000001168 August 29, 2023
Virani et al 2023 AHA/ACC/ACCP/ASPC/NLA/PCNA Chronic Coronary Disease Guideline e101 8. Khan SU, Singh M, Valavoor S, et al. Dual antiplatelet therapy after percu-
taneous coronary intervention and drug-eluting stents: a systematic review 
and network meta-analysis. Circulation. 2020;142:1425–1436.
 9. Palmerini T, Della Riva D, Benedetto U, et al. Three, six, or twelve months of 
dual antiplatelet therapy after DES implantation in patients with or without 
acute coronary syndromes: an individual patient data pairwise and network 
meta-analysis of six randomized trials and 11 473 patients. Eur Heart J. 
2017;38:1034–1043.
 10. O'Donoghue ML, Murphy SA, Sabatine MS. The safety and efficacy of aspi-
rin discontinuation on a background of a P2Y(12) inhibitor in patients after 
percutaneous coronary intervention: a systematic review and meta-analysis. 
Circulation. 2020;142:538–545.
 11. Kim BK, Hong MK, Shin DH, et al. A new strategy for discontinuation of dual 
antiplatelet therapy: the RESET Trial (REal Safety and Efficacy of 3-month 
dual antiplatelet Therapy following Endeavor zotarolimus-eluting stent im-
plantation). J Am Coll Cardiol. 2012;60:1340–1348.
 12. Feres F, Costa RA, Abizaid A, et al. Three vs Twelve Months of Dual Anti-
platelet Therapy After Zotarolimus-Eluting Stents: The OPTIMIZE Random-
ized Trial. JAMA. 2013;310:2510–2522.
 13. Udell JA, Bonaca MP, Collet JP, et al. Long-term dual antiplatelet therapy for 
secondary prevention of cardiovascular events in the subgroup of patients 
with previous myocardial infarction: a collaborative meta-analysis of ran-
domized trials. Eur Heart J. 2016;37:390–399.
 14. Bonaca MP, Bhatt DL, Cohen M, et al. Long-term use of ticagrelor in pa-
tients with prior myocardial infarction. N Engl J Med. 2015;372:1791–1800.
 15. Morrow DA, Braunwald E, Bonaca MP, et al. Vorapaxar in the secondary pre-
vention of atherothrombotic events. N Engl J Med. 2012;366:1404–1413.
 16. Scirica BM, Bonaca MP, Braunwald E, et al. Vorapaxar for secondary pre-
vention of thrombotic events for patients with previous myocardial infarc-
tion: a prespecified subgroup analysis of the TRA 2°P-TIMI 50 trial. The 
Lancet. 2012;380:1317–1324.
 17 . Bohula EA, Aylward PE, Bonaca MP, et al. Efficacy and safety of vorapaxar 
with and without a thienopyridine for secondary prevention in patients with 
previous myocardial infarction and no history of stroke or transient ischemic 
attack: results from TRA 2°P-TIMI 50. Circulation. 2015;132:1871–1879.
 18. Cardoso R, Knijnik L, Whelton SP, et al. Dual versus single antiplatelet ther-
apy after coronary artery bypass graft surgery: an updated meta-analysis. Int 
J Cardiol. 2018;269:80–88.
 19. Bhatt DL, Fox KA, Hacke W, et al. Clopidogrel and aspirin versus as-
pirin alone for the prevention of atherothrombotic events. N Engl J Med. 
2006;354:1706–1717 .
 20. Bonaca MP, Scirica BM, Braunwald E, et al. Coronary stent thrombosis with 
vorapaxar versus placebo: results from the TRA 2 degrees P-TIMI 50 trial. J 
Am Coll Cardiol. 2014;64:2309–2317 .
 21. Wiviott SD, Braunwald E, McCabe CH, et al. Prasugrel versus clopidogrel in 
patients with acute coronary syndromes. N Engl J Med. 2007;357:2001–
2015.
 22. Bhala N, Emberson J, Merhi A, et al.; Coxib and traditional NSAID Trialists' 
(CNT) Collaboration. Vascular and upper gastrointestinal effects of non-
steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs: meta-analyses of individual participant 
data from randomised trials. Lancet. 2013;382:769–779.
 23. Lopes RD, Hong H, Harskamp RE, et al. Optimal antithrombotic regimens 
for patients with atrial fibrillation undergoing percutaneous coronary inter-
vention: an updated network meta-analysis. JAMA Cardiol. 2020;5:582–
589.
 24. Lopes RD, Alexander KP, Stevens SR, et al. Initial invasive versus conserva-
tive management of stable ischemic heart disease in patients with a history 
of heart failure or left ventricular dysfunction: insights from the ISCHEMIA 
trial. Circulation. 2020;142:1725–1735.
 25. Lopes RD, Leonardi S, Wojdyla DM, et al. Stent thrombosis in patients with 
atrial fibrillation undergoing coronary stenting in the AUGUSTUS trial. Cir-
culation. 2020;141:781–783.
 26. Yasuda S, Kaikita K, Akao M, et al. Antithrombotic therapy for atrial fibrilla-
tion with stable coronary disease. N Engl J Med. 2019;381:1103–1113.
 27 . Gibson CM, Mehran R, Bode C, et al. Prevention of bleeding in patients with 
atrial fibrillation undergoing PCI. N Engl J Med. 2016;375:2423–2434.
 28. Potpara TS, Mujovic N, Proietti M, et al. Revisiting the effects of omitting 
aspirin in combined antithrombotic therapies for atrial fibrillation and acute 
coronary syndromes or percutaneous coronary interventions: meta-analysis 
of pooled data from the PIONEER AF-PCI, RE-DUAL PCI, and AUGUSTUS 
trials. Europace. 2020;22:33–46.
 29. Kumbhani DJ, Cannon CP, Beavers CJ, et al. 2020 ACC expert consensus 
decision pathway for anticoagulant and antiplatelet therapy in patients with 
atrial fibrillation or venous thromboembolism undergoing percutaneous cor-onary intervention or with atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease: a report of 
the American College of Cardiology Solution Set Oversight Committee. J 
Am Coll Cardiol. 2021;77:629–658.
 30. Bhatt DL, Eikelboom JW, Connolly SJ, et al. Role of combination antiplatelet 
and anticoagulation therapy in diabetes mellitus and cardiovascular disease: 
insights from the COMPASS trial. Circulation. 2020;141:1841–1854.
 31. Steffel J, Eikelboom JW, Anand SS, et al. The COMPASS trial: net clinical 
benefit of low-dose rivaroxaban plus aspirin as compared with aspirin in 
patients with chronic vascular disease. Circulation. 2020;142:40–48.
 32. Eikelboom JW, Connolly SJ, Bosch J, et al. Rivaroxaban with or without as-
pirin in stable cardiovascular disease. N Engl J Med. 2017;377:1319–1330.
 33. Guo H, Y e Z, Huang R. Clinical outcomes of concomitant use of proton 
pump inhibitors and dual antiplatelet therapy: a systematic review and meta-
analysis. Front Pharmacol. 2021;12:694698.
 34. Levine GN, Bates ER, Bittl JA, et al. 2016 ACC/AHA guideline focused 
update on duration of dual antiplatelet therapy in patients with coronary 
artery disease: a report of the American College of Cardiology/American 
Heart Association Task Force on Clinical Practice Guidelines. Circulation. 
2019;139:e879–e886.
 35. Lawton JS, Tamis-Holland JE, Bangalore S, et al. 2021 ACC/AHA/SCAI 
guideline for coronary artery revascularization: a report of the American Col-
lege of Cardiology/American Heart Association Joint Committee on Clinical 
Practice Guidelines. Circulation. 2022;145:e18–e114.
 36. McNeil JJ, Wolfe R, Woods RL, et al. Effect of aspirin on cardiovascular 
events and bleeding in the healthy elderly. N Engl J Med. 2018;379:1509–
1518.
 37 . Gaziano JM, Brotons C, Coppolecchia R, et al. Use of aspirin to reduce risk 
of initial vascular events in patients at moderate risk of cardiovascular dis-
ease (ARRIVE): a randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial. Lancet. 
2018;392:1036–1046.
 38. Mega JL, Braunwald E, Wiviott SD, et al. Rivaroxaban in patients with a 
recent acute coronary syndrome. N Engl J Med. 2012;366:9–19.
 39. Lopes RD, Heizer G, Aronson R, et al. Antithrombotic therapy after acute cor-
onary syndrome or PCI in atrial fibrillation. N Engl J Med. 2019;380:1509–
1524.
 40. Oldgren J, Budaj A, Granger CB, et al. Dabigatran vs. placebo in patients 
with acute coronary syndromes on dual antiplatelet therapy: a randomized, 
double-blind, phase II trial. Eur Heart J. 2011;32:2781–2789.
 41. Alexander JH, Lopes RD, James S, et al. Apixaban with antiplatelet therapy 
after acute coronary syndrome. N Engl J Med. 2011;365:699–708.
 42. Chiarito M, Cao D, Cannata F, et al. Direct oral anticoagulants in addition 
to antiplatelet therapy for secondary prevention after acute coronary syn-
dromes: a systematic review and meta-analysis. JAMA Cardiol. 2018;3:234–
241.
 43. Mo F, Li J, Yan Y, et al. Effect and safety of antithrombotic therapies for sec-
ondary prevention after acute coronary syndrome: a network meta-analysis. 
Drug Des Devel Ther. 2018;12:3583–3594.
 44. Seligman WH, Das-Gupta Z, Jobi-Odeneye AO, et al. Development of an 
international standard set of outcome measures for patients with atrial 
fibrillation: a report of the International Consortium for Health Outcomes 
Measurement (ICHOM) atrial fibrillation working group. Eur Heart J. 
2020;41:1132–1140.
 45. C. Antithrombotic Trialists. Collaborative meta-analysis of randomised trials 
of antiplatelet therapy for prevention of death, myocardial infarction, and 
stroke in high risk patients. BMJ. 2002;324:71–86.
 46. Koo BK, Kang J, Park KW, et al. Aspirin versus clopidogrel for chronic 
maintenance monotherapy after percutaneous coronary intervention 
(HOST-EXAM): an investigator-initiated, prospective, randomised, open-
label, multicentre trial. Lancet. 2021;397:2487–2496.
 47 . Watanabe H, Domei T, Morimoto T, et al. Effect of 1-month dual antiplatelet 
therapy followed by clopidogrel vs 12-month dual antiplatelet therapy on 
cardiovascular and bleeding events in patients receiving PCI: the STOP-
DAPT-2 randomized clinical trial. JAMA. 2019;321:2414–2427 .
 48. Kim BK, Hong SJ, Cho YH, et al. Effect of ticagrelor monotherapy vs ti-
cagrelor with aspirin on major bleeding and cardiovascular events in pa-
tients with acute coronary syndrome: the TICO randomized clinical trial. 
JAMA. 2020;323:2407–2416.
 49. Kim HS, Kang J, Hwang D, et al. Prasugrel-based de-escalation of dual an-
tiplatelet therapy after percutaneous coronary intervention in patients with 
acute coronary syndrome (HOST-REDUCE-POL YTECH-ACS): an open-
label, multicentre, non-inferiority randomised trial. Lancet. 2020;396:1079–
1089.
 50. Mehran R, Baber U, Sharma SK, et al. Ticagrelor with or without aspirin in 
high-risk patients after PCI. N Engl J Med. 2019;381:2032–2042.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on November 12, 2025

CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINESAugust 29, 2023 Circulation. 2023;148:e9–e119. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000001168
Virani et al 2023 AHA/ACC/ACCP/ASPC/NLA/PCNA Chronic Coronary Disease Guideline e102 51. Vranckx P, Valgimigli M, Juni P, et al. Ticagrelor plus aspirin for 1 month, fol-
lowed by ticagrelor monotherapy for 23 months vs aspirin plus clopidogrel 
or ticagrelor for 12 months, followed by aspirin monotherapy for 12 months 
after implantation of a drug-eluting stent: a multicentre, open-label, ran-
domised superiority trial. Lancet. 2018;392:940–949.
 52. Hahn JY, Song YB, Oh JH, et al. Effect of P2Y12 inhibitor monotherapy vs 
dual antiplatelet therapy on cardiovascular events in patients undergoing 
percutaneous coronary intervention: the SMART-CHOICE randomized clini-
cal trial. JAMA. 2019;321:2428–2437 .
 53. Bittl JA. How long should dual antiplatelet therapy be used in diabetic patients 
after implantation of drug-eluting stents?. Curr Opin Cardiol. 2016;31:677–682.
 54. Bittl JA. The Tradeoff Between Shorter and Longer Courses of Dual An-
tiplatelet Therapy After Implantation of Newer Generation Drug-Eluting 
Stents. Curr Cardiol Rep. 2016;18:8.
 55. Bittl JA, Baber U, Bradley SM, et al. Duration of dual antiplatelet therapy: a sys-
tematic review for the 2016 ACC/AHA guideline focused update on duration 
of dual antiplatelet therapy in patients with coronary artery disease: a report of 
the American College of Cardiology/American Heart Association Task Force 
on Clinical Practice Guidelines. Circulation. 2016;134:e156–e178.
 56. Pirlet C, Legrand V, Nyssen A, et al. Duration of dual anti-platelet therapy - 
State of the art after the DAPT and PEGASUS-TIMI 54 trials. Acta Cardiol. 
2017;72:256–264.
 57 . Capodanno D, Bhatt DL, Goto S, et al. Safety and efficacy of protease-activated 
receptor-1 antagonists in patients with coronary artery disease: a meta-analy-
sis of randomized clinical trials. J Thromb Haemost. 2012;10:2006–2015.
 58. Goldenberg MM. Pharmaceutical approval update. P T. 2009;34:86–94.
 59. Lopes RD, Hong H, Harskamp RE, et al. Safety and efficacy of antithrom-
botic strategies in patients with atrial fibrillation undergoing percutaneous 
coronary intervention: a network meta-analysis of randomized controlled tri-
als. JAMA Cardiol. 2019;4:747–755.
 60. Berry NC, Mauri L, Steg PG, et al. Effect of Lesion Complexity and Clinical 
Risk Factors on the Efficacy and Safety of Dabigatran Dual Therapy Versus 
Warfarin Triple Therapy in Atrial Fibrillation After Percutaneous Coronary 
Intervention: A Subgroup Analysis From the REDUAL PCI Trial. Circ Cardio-
vasc Interv. 2020;13:e008349.
 61. Angiolillo DJ, Bhatt DL, Cannon CP, et al. Antithrombotic therapy in patients 
with atrial fibrillation treated with oral anticoagulation undergoing percuta-
neous coronary intervention: a North American perspective: 2021 update. 
Circulation. 2021;143:583–596.
 62. Angiolillo DJ, Cao D, Baber U, et al. Impact of Age on the Safety and Ef-
ficacy of Ticagrelor Monotherapy in Patients Undergoing PCI. JACC: Car-
diovascular Interventions. 2021;14:1434–1446.
 63. Alexander JH, Wojdyla D, Vora AN, et al. Risk/Benefit Tradeoff of Anti-
thrombotic Therapy in Patients With Atrial Fibrillation Early and Late After an 
Acute Coronary Syndrome or Percutaneous Coronary Intervention: Insights 
From AUGUSTUS. Circulation. 2020;141:1618–1627 .
 64. Lamberts M, Gislason GH, Lip GYH, et al. Antiplatelet therapy for stable 
coronary artery disease in atrial fibrillation patients taking an oral anticoagu-
lant. Circulation. 2014;129:1577–1585.
 65. Lemesle G, Ducrocq G, Elbez Y, et al. Vitamin K antagonists with or without 
long-term antiplatelet therapy in outpatients with stable coronary artery dis-
ease and atrial fibrillation: association with ischemic and bleeding events. 
Clin Cardiol. 2017;40:932–939.
 66. Bainey KR, Welsh RC, Connolly SJ, et al. Rivaroxaban plus aspirin versus aspirin 
alone in patients with prior percutaneous coronary intervention (COMPASS-
PCI). Circulation. 2020;14:1141-1151.
 67 . Hurlen M, Abdelnoor M, Smith P, et al. Warfarin, aspirin, or both after myo-
cardial infarction. N Engl J Med. 2002;347:969–974.
 68. Matoba T, Yasuda S, Kaikita K, et al. Rivaroxaban monotherapy in patients 
with atrial fibrillation after coronary stenting: insights from the AFIRE trial. J 
Am Coll Cardiol Intv. 2021;14:2330–2340.
 69. Hamon M, Lemesle G, Tricot O, et al. Incidence, source, determinants, and 
prognostic impact of major bleeding in outpatients with stable coronary ar-
tery disease. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2014;64:1430–1436.
 70. Knuuti J, Wijns W, Saraste A, et al. 2019 ESC guidelines for the diag-
nosis and management of chronic coronary syndromes. Eur Heart J. 
2020;41:407–477 .
 71. Han Y, Liao Z, Li Y, et al. Magnetically-controlled capsule endoscopy for 
assessment of antiplatelet therapy-induced gastrointestinal injury. J Am Coll 
Cardiol. 2021;79:116–128.
4.3.2. Beta Blockers
 1. Dargie HJ. Effect of carvedilol on outcome after myocardial infarction in 
patients with left-ventricular dysfunction: the CAPRICORN randomised trial. 
Lancet. 2001;357:1385–1390. 2. Joo SJ, Kim SY, Choi JH, et al. Effect of beta-blocker therapy in patients 
with or without left ventricular systolic dysfunction after acute myocardial 
infarction. Eur Heart J Cardiovasc Pharmacother. 2021;7:475–482.
 3. Packer M, Fowler MB, Roecker EB, et al. Effect of carvedilol on the morbid-
ity of patients with severe chronic heart failure: results of the carvedilol pro-
spective randomized cumulative survival (COPERNICUS) study. Circulation. 
2002;106:2194–2199.
 4. Effect of metoprolol CR/XL in chronic heart failure: Metoprolol CR/XL 
Randomised Intervention Trial in Congestive Heart Failure (MERIT-HF). 
Lancet. 1999;353:2001–2007 .
 5. Australia-New Zealand Heart Failure Research Collaborative Group. Effects 
of carvedilol, a vasodilator-beta-blocker, in patients with congestive heart 
failure due to ischemic heart disease Circulation. 1995;92:212–218.
 6. Eichhorn EJ, Domanski MJ, et al.; Investigators. B-BEoST. A trial of the beta-
blocker bucindolol in patients with advanced chronic heart failure. N Engl J 
Med. 2001;344:1659–1667 .
 7 . Poole-Wilson PA, Swedberg K, Cleland JG, et al. Comparison of carvedilol 
and metoprolol on clinical outcomes in patients with chronic heart failure 
in the Carvedilol Or Metoprolol European Trial (COMET): randomised con-
trolled trial. Lancet. 2003;362:7–13.
 8. Leizorovicz A, Lechat P, Cucherat M, et al. Bisoprolol for the treatment of 
chronic heart failure: a meta-analysis on individual data of two placebo-con-
trolled studies--CIBIS and CIBIS II. Cardiac Insufficiency Bisoprolol Study. 
Am Heart J. 2002;143:301–307 .
 9. Bangalore S, Makani H, Radford M, et al. Clinical outcomes with beta-block-
ers for myocardial infarction: a meta-analysis of randomized trials. Am J 
Med. 2014;127:939–953.
 10. Goldberger JJ, Subacius H, Marroquin OC, et al. One-year landmark analy-
sis of the effect of beta-blocker dose on survival after acute myocardial 
infarction. J Am Heart Assoc. 2021;10:e019017 .
 11. Kim J, Kang D, Park H, et al. Long-term beta-blocker therapy and clinical 
outcomes after acute myocardial infarction in patients without heart failure: 
nationwide cohort study. Eur Heart J. 2020;41:3521–3529.
 12. Raposeiras-Roubin S, Abu-Assi E, Redondo-Dieguez A, et al. Prognostic 
benefit of beta-blockers after acute coronary syndrome with preserved sys-
tolic function. Still relevant today?. Rev Esp Cardiol (Engl Ed). 2015;68:585–
591.
 13. Dondo TB, Hall M, West RM, et al. Beta-blockers and mortality after acute 
myocardial infarction in patients without heart failure or ventricular dysfunc-
tion. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2017;69:2710–2720.
 14. Holt A, Blanche P, Zareini B, et al. Effect of long-term beta-blocker treat-
ment following myocardial infarction among stable, optimally treated pa-
tients without heart failure in the reperfusion era: a Danish, nationwide 
cohort study. Eur Heart J. 2021;42:907–914.
 15. Park CS, Yang HM, Ki Y J, et al. Left ventricular ejection fraction 1 year after 
acute myocardial infarction identifies the benefits of the long-term use of 
beta-blockers: analysis of data from the KAMIR-NIH registry. Circ Cardio-
vasc Interv. 2021;14:e010159.
 16. Dahl Aarvik M, Sandven I, Dondo TB, et al. Effect of oral beta-blocker treat-
ment on mortality in contemporary post-myocardial infarction patients: a 
systematic review and meta-analysis. Eur Heart J Cardiovasc Pharmacother. 
2019;5:12–20.
 17 . Bangalore S, Bhatt DL, Steg PG, et al. Beta-blockers and cardiovascular 
events in patients with and without myocardial infarction: post hoc analysis 
from the CHARISMA trial. Circ Cardiovasc Qual Outcomes. 2014;7:872–881.
 18. Bangalore S, Steg G, Deedwania P, et al. Beta-blocker use and clinical out-
comes in stable outpatients with and without coronary artery disease. JAMA. 
2012;308:1340–1349.
 19. Motivala AA, Parikh V, Roe M, et al. Predictors, trends, and outcomes 
(among older patients >/=65 years of age) associated with beta-blocker 
use in patients with stable angina undergoing elective percutaneous coro-
nary intervention: insights from the NCDR registry. J Am Coll Cardiol Intv. 
2016;9:1639–1648.
 20. Heidenreich PA, Bozkurt B, Aguilar D, et al. 2022 AHA/ACC/HFSA guide-
line for the management of heart failure: a report of the American College of 
Cardiology/American Heart Association Joint Committee on Clinical Prac-
tice Guidelines. Circulation. 2022;145:e895–e1032.
 21. Lawton JS, Tamis-Holland JE, Bangalore S, et al. 2021 ACC/AHA/SCAI 
guideline for coronary artery revascularization: a report of the American Col-
lege of Cardiology/American Heart Association Joint Committee on Clinical 
Practice Guidelines. Circulation. 2022;145:e18–e114.
 22. Vantrimpont P, Rouleau JL, Wun CC, et al. Additive beneficial effects of 
beta-blockers to angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors in the Survival 
and Ventricular Enlargement (SAVE) Study. SAVE Investigators. J Am Coll 
Cardiol. 1997;29:229–236.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on November 12, 2025

CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINESCirculation. 2023;148:e9–e119. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000001168 August 29, 2023
Virani et al 2023 AHA/ACC/ACCP/ASPC/NLA/PCNA Chronic Coronary Disease Guideline e103 23. Boberg J, Larsen FF, Pehrsson SK. The effects of beta blockade with (epa-
nolol) and without (atenolol) intrinsic sympathomimetic activity in stable an-
gina pectoris. The Visacor Study Group. Clin Cardiol. 1992;15:591–595.
 24. Goldstein S. Beta-blocking drugs and coronary heart disease. Cardiovasc 
Drugs Ther. 1997;11(suppl 1):219–225.
 25. Packer M, Bristow MR, Cohn JN, et al. The effect of carvedilol on morbid-
ity and mortality in patients with chronic heart failure. U.S. Carvedilol Heart 
Failure Study Group. N Engl J Med. 1996;334:1349–1355.
 26. Yancy CW, Jessup M, Bozkurt B, et al. 2013 ACCF/AHA guideline for the 
management of heart failure: a report of the American College of Cardiol-
ogy Foundation/American Heart Association Task Force on Practice Guide-
lines. Circulation. 2013;128:e240–e327 .
 27 . Sorbets E, Steg PG, Young R, et al. Beta-blockers, calcium antagonists, and 
mortality in stable coronary artery disease: an international cohort study. Eur 
Heart J. 2019;40:1399–1407 .
 28. Al-Khatib SM, Stevenson WG, Ackerman MJ, et al. 2017 AHA/ACC/HRS 
guideline for management of patients with ventricular arrhythmias and the 
prevention of sudden cardiac death: a report of the American College of 
Cardiology/American Heart Association Task Force on Clinical Practice 
Guidelines and the Heart Rhythm Society. Circulation. 2018;138:e272–
e391.
 29. January CT, Wann LS, Calkins H, et al. 2019 AHA/ACC/HRS focused up-
date of the 2014 AHA/ACC/HRS guideline for the management of pa-
tients with atrial fibrillation: a report of the American College of Cardiology/
American Heart Association Task Force on Clinical Practice Guidelines and 
the Heart Rhythm Society, in collaboration with the Society of Thoracic Sur-
geons. Circulation. 2019;140:e125–e151.
 30. The Cardiac Insufficiency Bisoprolol Study II (CIBIS-II): a randomised trial. 
Lancet. 1999;353:9–13.
 31. Domanski MJ, Krause-Steinrauf H, Massie BM, et al. A comparative analysis 
of the results from 4 trials of beta-blocker therapy for heart failure: BEST, 
CIBIS-II, MERIT-HF, and COPERNICUS. J Card Fail. 2003;9:354–363.
 32. Flather MD, Shibata MC, Coats AJ, et al. Randomized trial to determine 
the effect of nebivolol on mortality and cardiovascular hospital admission in 
elderly patients with heart failure (SENIORS). Eur Heart J. 2005;26:215–
225.
 33. Fihn SD, Gardin JM, Abrams J, et al. 2012 ACCF/AHA/ACP/AATS/
PCNA/SCAI/STS guideline for the diagnosis and management of patients 
with stable ischemic heart disease: a report of the American College of 
Cardiology Foundation/American Heart Association Task Force on Practice 
Guidelines, and the American College of Physicians, American Association 
for Thoracic Surgery, Preventive Cardiovascular Nurses Association, Society 
for Cardiovascular Angiography and Interventions, and Society of Thoracic 
Surgeons. Circulation. 2012;126:e354–e471.
 34. Jackevicius CA, Krumholz HM, Ross JS, et al. Clinical Outcomes With Beta-
Blocker Use in Patients With Recent History of Myocardial Infarction. Can J 
Cardiol. 2020;36:1633–1640.
4.3.3. Renin-Angiotensin-Aldosterone Inhibitors
 1. Flather MD, Yusuf S, Koeber L, et al. Long-term ACE-inhibitor therapy in 
patients with heart failure or left-ventricular dysfunction: a systematic over-
view of data from individual patients. ACE-Inhibitor Myocardial Infarction 
Collaborative Group. Lancet. 2000;355:1575–1581.
 2. Pfeffer MA, Braunwald E, Moye LA, et al. Effect of captopril on mortality and 
morbidity in patients with left ventricular dysfunction after myocardial in-
farction. Results of the survival and ventricular enlargement trial. The SAVE 
Investigators. N Engl J Med. 1992;327:669–677 .
 3. Yusuf S, Pitt B, Davis CE, et al. Effect of enalapril on mortality and the devel-
opment of heart failure in asymptomatic patients with reduced left ventricu-
lar ejection fractions. N Engl J Med. 1992;327:685–691.
 4. Koeber L, Torp-Pedersen C, Carlsen JE, et al. A clinical trial of the angio-
tensin-converting-enzyme inhibitor trandolapril in patients with left ventricu-
lar dysfunction after myocardial infarction. Trandolapril Cardiac Evaluation 
(TRACE) Study Group. N Engl J Med. 1995;333:1670–1676.
 5. Effect of ramipril on mortality and morbidity of survivors of acute myocar-
dial infarction with clinical evidence of heart failure. The Acute Infarction 
Ramipril Efficacy (AIRE) Study Investigators. Lancet. 1993;342:821–828.
 6. Bangalore S, Fakheri R, Wandel S, et al. Renin angiotensin system inhibitors 
for patients with stable coronary artery disease without heart failure: sys-
tematic review and meta-analysis of randomized trials. BMJ. 2017;356:j4.
 7 . Bosch J, Lonn EM, Jung H, et al. Lowering cholesterol, blood pressure, or 
both to prevent cardiovascular events: results of 8.7 years of follow-up of 
Heart Outcomes Evaluation Prevention (HOPE)-3 study participants. Eur 
Heart J. 2021;42:2995–3007 . 8. Nissen SE, Tuzcu EM, Libby P, et al. Effect of antihypertensive agents on 
cardiovascular events in patients with coronary disease and normal blood 
pressure. The CAMELOT study: a randomized controlled trial. JAMA. 
2004;292:2217–2226.
 9. Fox KM. Efficacy of perindopril in reduction of cardiovascular events 
among patients with stable coronary artery disease: randomised, double-
blind, placebo-controlled, multicentre trial (the EUROPA study). Lancet. 
2003;362:782–788.
 10. Yusuf S, Sleight P, Pogue J, et al. Effects of an angiotensin-converting-
enzyme inhibitor, ramipril, on cardiovascular events in high-risk patients. N 
Engl J Med. 2000;342:145–153.
 11. Solomon SD, Rice MM, K AJ, et al. Renal function and effectiveness of an-
giotensin-converting enzyme inhibitor therapy in patients with chronic stable 
coronary disease in the Prevention of Events with ACE inhibition (PEACE) 
trial. Circulation. 2006;114:26–31.
 12. Darabian S, Luo Y, Homat A, et al. CAC score as a possible criterion for ad-
ministration of angiotensin converting enzyme inhibitors and/or angiotensin 
receptor blockers: the MultiEthnic Study of Atherosclerosis. Coron Artery 
Dis. 2015;26:678–685.
 13. Pitt B, O'Neill B, Feldman R, et al. The QUinapril Ischemic Event Trial 
(QUIET): evaluation of chronic ACE inhibitor therapy in patients with isch-
emic heart disease and preserved left ventricular function. Am J Cardiol. 
2001;87:1058–1063.
 14. Yusuf S, Teo K, Anderson C, et al.; Telmisartan Randomised AssessmeNt 
Study in ACE iNtolerant subjects with cardiovascular Disease (TRAN-
SCEND) Investigators. Effects of the angiotensin-receptor blocker 
telmisartan on cardiovascular events in high-risk patients intolerant to 
angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors: a randomised controlled trial. 
Lancet. 2008;372:1174–1183.
 15. Lim S, Choo EH, Choi IJ, et al. Angiotensin receptor blockers as an alterna-
tive to angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors in patients with acute myo-
cardial infarction undergoing percutaneous coronary intervention. J Korean 
Med Sci. 2019;34:e289.
 16. Carnethon MR, Pu J, Howard G, et al. Cardiovascular health in African 
Americans: a scientific statement from the American Heart Association. 
Circulation. 2017;136:e393–e423.
 17 . Maddox TM, Januzzi JL Jr, Allen LA, et al. 2021 Update to the 2017 ACC 
expert consensus decision pathway for optimization of heart failure treat-
ment: answers to 10 pivotal issues about heart failure with reduced ejection 
fraction: a report of the American College of Cardiology Solution Set Over-
sight Committee. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2021;77:772–810.
 18. Patel A, Group AC, MacMahon S, et al. Effects of a fixed combination of 
perindopril and indapamide on macrovascular and microvascular outcomes 
in patients with type 2 diabetes mellitus (the ADVANCE trial): a randomised 
controlled trial. Lancet. 2007;370:829–840.
 19. Heidenreich PA, Bozkurt B, Aguilar D, et al. 2022 AHA/ACC/HFSA guide-
line for the management of heart failure: a report of the American College of 
Cardiology/American Heart Association Joint Committee on Clinical Prac-
tice Guidelines. Circulation. 2022;145:e895–e1032.
 20. Braunwald E, Domanski MJ, Fowler SE, et al. Angiotensin-converting-
enzyme inhibition in stable coronary artery disease. N Engl J Med. 
2004;351:2058–2068.
 21. Sud M, Ko DT, Chong A, et al. Renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system inhibi-
tors and major cardiovascular events and acute kidney injury in patients with 
coronary artery disease. Pharmacotherapy. 2021;41:988–997 .
4.3.4. Colchicine
 1. Nidorf SM, Eikelboom JW, Budgeon CA, et al. Low-dose colchicine 
for secondary prevention of cardiovascular disease. J Am Coll Cardiol. 
2013;61:404–410.
 2. Nidorf SM, Fiolet ATL, Mosterd A, et al. Colchicine in patients with chronic 
coronary disease. N Engl J Med. 2020;383:1838–1847 .
 3. Hansson GK. Inflammation, atherosclerosis, and coronary artery disease. N 
Engl J Med. 2005;352:1685–1695.
 4. Ridker PM, Everett BM, Thuren T, et al. Anti-inflammatory therapy with 
canakinumab for atherosclerotic disease. N Engl J Med. 2017;377:1119–
1131.
 5. Ridker PM, Everett BM, Pradhan A, et al. Low-dose methotrexate for the 
prevention of atherosclerotic events. N Engl J Med. 2019;380:752–762.
 6. Rott KT, Agudelo CA. Gout. JAMA. 2003;289:2857–2860.
 7 . Molad Y, Reibman J, Levin KI, et al. A new mode of action for an old drug: 
colchicine decreases surface expression of adhesion molecules on both 
neutrophils (PMNs) and endothelium [abstract]. Arthritis Rheum. 1992;35 
(abstract):S35.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on November 12, 2025

CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINESAugust 29, 2023 Circulation. 2023;148:e9–e119. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000001168
Virani et al 2023 AHA/ACC/ACCP/ASPC/NLA/PCNA Chronic Coronary Disease Guideline e104 8. Tardif JC, Kouz S, Waters DD, et al. Efficacy and safety of low-dose colchi-
cine after myocardial infarction. N Engl J Med. 2019;381:2497–2505.
 9. Visseren FLJ, Mach F, Smulders YM, et al. 2021 ESC guidelines on car-
diovascular disease prevention in clinical practice. Eur J Prev Cardiol. 
2021;42:3227–3337 .
 10. Dixon DL, Patel J, Spence R, et al. Select drug-drug interactions with colchi-
cine and cardiovascular medications: a review. Am Heart J. 2022;252:42–50.
4.3.5. Immunizations
 1. Barnes M, Heywood AE, Mahimbo A, et al. Acute myocardial infarction and 
influenza: a meta-analysis of case-control studies. Heart. 2015;101:1738–
1 747.
 2. Udell JA, Zawi R, Bhatt DL, et al. Association between influenza vaccination 
and cardiovascular outcomes in high-risk patients: a meta-analysis. JAMA. 
2013;310:1711–1720.
 3. Rodrigues BS, Alves M, Duarte GS, et al. The impact of influenza vaccination 
in patients with cardiovascular disease: an overview of systematic reviews. 
Trends Cardiovasc Med. 2021;31:315–320.
 4. Clar C, Oseni Z, Flowers N, et al. Influenza vaccines for preventing cardio-
vascular disease. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2015;CD005050.
 5. Rodrigues BS, David C, Costa J, et al. Influenza vaccination in patients with 
heart failure: a systematic review and meta-analysis of observational stud-
ies. Heart. 2020;106:350–357 .
 6. Vardeny O, Kim K, Udell JA, et al. Effect of high-dose trivalent vs standard-
dose quadrivalent influenza vaccine on mortality or cardiopulmonary hos-
pitalization in patients with high-risk cardiovascular disease: a randomized 
clinical trial. JAMA. 2021;325:39–49.
 7 . Y edlapati SH, Khan SU, Talluri S, et al. Effects of influenza vaccine on mor-
tality and cardiovascular outcomes in patients with cardiovascular disease: a 
systematic review and meta-analysis. J Am Heart Assoc. 2021;10:e019636.
 8. Driggin E, Maddox TM, Ferdinand KC, et al. ACC health policy statement on 
cardiovascular disease considerations for COVID-19 vaccine prioritization: 
a report of the American College of Cardiology Solution Set Oversight Com-
mittee. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2021;77:1938–1948.
 9. Oster ME, Shay DK, Su JR, et al. Myocarditis cases reported after mRNA-
based COVID-19 vaccination in the US from December 2020 to August 
2021. JAMA. 2022;327:331–340.
 10. Yang MJ, Rooks BJ, Le TT, et al. Influenza vaccination and hospitalizations 
among COVID-19 infected adults. J Am Board Fam Med. 2021;34:S179–
S182.
 11. Eurich DT, Johnstone JJ, Minhas-Sandhu JK, et al. Pneumococcal vacci-
nation and risk of acute coronary syndromes in patients with pneumonia: 
population-based cohort study. Heart. 2012;98:1072–1077 .
 12. Marques Antunes M, Duarte GS, Brito D, et al. Pneumococcal vaccination 
in adults at very high risk or with established cardiovascular disease: sys-
tematic review and meta-analysis. Eur Heart J Qual Care Clin Outcomes. 
2021;7:97–106.
 13. Ma J, Mena M, Mandania RA, et al. Associations between combined influen-
za and pneumococcal pneumonia vaccination and cardiovascular outcomes. 
Cardiology. 2021;146:772–780.
 14. Fountoulaki K, Tsiodras S, Polyzogopoulou E, et al. Beneficial effects of vac-
cination on cardiovascular events: myocardial infarction, stroke, heart failure. 
Cardiology. 2018;141:98–106.
 15. US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Guidance for COVID-19. 
Accessed March 20, 2022. https://www.cdc.gov/coronavirus/2019-ncov/
communication/guidance.html.
4.3.6. Medical Therapy for Relief of Angina
 1. Narahara KA. Double-blind comparison of once daily betaxolol versus pro-
pranolol four times daily in stable angina pectoris. Betaxolol Investigators 
Group. Am J Cardiol. 1990;65:577–582.
 2. Frishman WH, Heiman M, Soberman J, et al. Comparison of celiprolol and 
propranolol in stable angina pectoris. Celiprolol International Angina Study 
Group. Am J Cardiol. 1991;67:665–670.
 3. Heidenreich PA, McDonald KM, Hastie T, et al. Meta-analysis of trials com-
paring beta-blockers, calcium antagonists, and nitrates for stable angina. 
JAMA. 1999;281:1927–1936.
 4. Ferrari R, Pavasini R, Camici PG, et al. Anti-anginal drugs-beliefs and evi-
dence: systematic review covering 50 years of medical treatment. Eur Heart 
J. 2019;40:190–194.
 5. Belsey J, Savelieva I, Mugelli A, et al. Relative efficacy of antianginal drugs 
used as add-on therapy in patients with stable angina: a systematic review 
and meta-analysis. Eur J Prev Cardiol. 2015;22:837–848.
 6. Savonitto S, Ardissiono D, Egstrup K, et al. Combination therapy with meto-
prolol and nifedipine versus monotherapy in patients with stable angina pectoris: results of the International Multicenter Angina Exercise (IMAGE) 
Study. J Am Coll Cardiol. 1996;27:311–316.
 7 . Chaitman BR, Pepine CJ, Parker JO, et al. Effects of ranolazine with ateno-
lol, amlodipine, or diltiazem on exercise tolerance and angina frequency in 
patients with severe chronic angina: a randomized controlled trial. JAMA. 
2004;291:309–316.
 8. Stone PH, Gratsiansky NA, Blokhin A, et al. Antianginal efficacy of rano-
lazine when added to treatment with amlodipine: the ERICA (Efficacy of 
Ranolazine in Chronic Angina) trial. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2006;48:566–575.
 9. Ohman EM. Chronic stable angina. N Engl J Med. 2016;375:293.
 10. Wight LJ, VandenBurg MJ, Potter CE, et al. A large scale compara-
tive study in general practice with nitroglycerin spray and tablet formu-
lations in elderly patients with angina pectoris. Eur J Clin Pharmacol. 
1992;42:341–342.
 11. Fox K, Ford I, Steg PG, et al. Ivabradine in stable coronary artery disease 
without clinical heart failure. N Engl J Med. 2014;371:1091–1099.
 12. Fihn SD, Gardin JM, Abrams J, et al. 2012 ACCF/AHA/ACP/AATS/
PCNA/SCAI/STS guideline for the diagnosis and management of patients 
with stable ischemic heart disease: a report of the American College of 
Cardiology Foundation/American Heart Association Task Force on Practice 
Guidelines, and the American College of Physicians, American Association 
for Thoracic Surgery, Preventive Cardiovascular Nurses Association, Society 
for Cardiovascular Angiography and Interventions, and Society of Thoracic 
Surgeons. Circulation. 2012;126:e354–e471.
 13. Spertus JA, Jones PG, Maron DJ, et al. Health-status outcomes with invasive 
or conservative care in coronary disease. N Engl J Med. 2020;382:1408–
1419.
 14. Sherman LG, Liang CS. Nifedipine in chronic stable angina: a double-blind 
placebo-controlled crossover trial. Am J Cardiol. 1983;51:706–711.
 15. Taylor SH, Lee P, Jackson N, et al. A four-week double-blind, placebo-con-
trolled, parallel dose-response study of amlodipine in patients with stable 
exertional angina pectoris. Am Heart J. 1989;118:1133–1134.
 16. Wei J, Wu T, Yang Q, et al. Nitrates for stable angina: a systematic review and 
meta-analysis of randomized clinical trials. Int J Cardiol. 2011;146:4–12.
 17 . Goldstein RE, Boccuzzi SJ, Cruess D, et al. Diltiazem increases late-onset 
congestive heart failure in postinfarction patients with early reduction in 
ejection fraction. The Adverse Experience Committee; and the Multicenter 
Diltiazem Postinfarction Research Group. Circulation. 1991;83:52–60.
 18. Tardif JC, Ford I, Tendera M, et al. Efficacy of ivabradine, a new selective I(f) 
inhibitor, compared with atenolol in patients with chronic stable angina. Eur 
Heart J. 2005;26:2529–2536.
 19. Ruzyllo W, Tendera M, Ford I, et al. Antianginal efficacy and safety of iv-
abradine compared with amlodipine in patients with stable effort angina 
pectoris: a 3-month randomised, double-blind, multicentre, noninferiority 
trial. Drugs. 2007;67:393–405.
4.3.7 . Management of Refractory Angina
 1. Arora RR, Chou TM, Jain D, et al. The multicenter study of enhanced external 
counterpulsation (MUST-EECP): effect of EECP on exercise-induced myo-
cardial ischemia and anginal episodes. J Am Coll Cardiol. 1999;33:1833–
1840.
 2. Fihn SD, Gardin JM, Abrams J, et al. 2012 ACCF/AHA/ACP/AATS/
PCNA/SCAI/STS guideline for the diagnosis and management of patients 
with stable ischemic heart disease: a report of the American College of 
Cardiology Foundation/American Heart Association Task Force on Practice 
Guidelines, and the American College of Physicians, American Association 
for Thoracic Surgery, Preventive Cardiovascular Nurses Association, Society 
for Cardiovascular Angiography and Interventions, and Society of Thoracic 
Surgeons. Circulation. 2012;126:e354–e471.
 3. Davies A, Fox K, Galassi AR, et al. Management of refractory angina: an 
update. Eur Heart J. 2021;42:269–283.
 4. Lawton JS, Tamis-Holland JE, Bangalore S, et al. 2021 ACC/AHA/SCAI 
guideline for coronary artery revascularization: a report of the American Col-
lege of Cardiology/American Heart Association Joint Committee on Clinical 
Practice Guidelines. Circulation. 2022;145:e18–e114.
 5. Caceres J, Atal P, Arora R, et al. Enhanced external counterpulsation: a 
unique treatment for the “no-option” refractory angina patient. J Clin Pharm 
Ther. 2021;46:295–303.
 6. Leon MB, Kornowski R, Downey WE, et al. A blinded, randomized, placebo-
controlled trial of percutaneous laser myocardial revascularization to im-
prove angina symptoms in patients with severe coronary disease. J Am Coll 
Cardiol. 2005;46:1812–1819.
 7 . Briones E, Lacalle JR, Marin-Leon I, et al. Transmyocardial laser revascu-
larization versus medical therapy for refractory angina. Cochrane Database 
Syst Rev. 2015;2015:CD003712.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on November 12, 2025

CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINESCirculation. 2023;148:e9–e119. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000001168 August 29, 2023
Virani et al 2023 AHA/ACC/ACCP/ASPC/NLA/PCNA Chronic Coronary Disease Guideline e105 8. Fihn SD, Blankenship JC, Alexander KP, et al. 2014 ACC/AHA/AATS/
PCNA/SCAI/STS focused update of the guideline for the diagnosis and 
management of patients with stable ischemic heart disease: a report of the 
American College of Cardiology/American Heart Association Task Force 
on Practice Guidelines, and the American Association for Thoracic Surgery, 
Preventive Cardiovascular Nurses Association, Society for Cardiovascular 
Angiography and Interventions, and Society of Thoracic Surgeons. Circula-
tion. 2014;130:1749–1767 .
4.3.8. Chelation Therapy
 1. Lamas GA, Navas-Acien A, Mark DB, et al. Heavy metals, cardiovascular 
disease, and the unexpected benefits of chelation therapy. J Am Coll Cardiol. 
2016;67:2411–2418.
 2. Guldager B, Jelnes R, Jorgensen SJ, et al. EDTA treatment of intermit-
tent claudication--a double-blind, placebo-controlled study. J Intern Med. 
1992;231:261–267 .
 3. van Rij AM, Solomon C, Packer SG, et al. Chelation therapy for intermit-
tent claudication. A double-blind, randomized, controlled trial. Circulation. 
1994;90:1194–1199.
 4. Sloth-Nielsen J, Guldager B, Mouritzen C, et al. Arteriographic find-
ings in EDTA chelation therapy on peripheral arteriosclerosis. Am J Surg. 
1991;162:122–125.
 5. Knudtson ML, Wyse DG, Galbraith PD, et al. Chelation therapy for ischemic 
heart disease: a randomized controlled trial. JAMA. 2002;287:481–486.
 6. Lamas GA, Goertz C, Boineau R, et al. Effect of disodium EDTA chelation 
regimen on cardiovascular events in patients with previous myocardial in-
farction: the TACT randomized trial. JAMA. 2013;309:1241–1250.
 7 . Escolar E, Lamas GA, Mark DB, et al. The effect of an EDTA-based chela-
tion regimen on patients with diabetes mellitus and prior myocardial infarc-
tion in the Trial to Assess Chelation Therapy (TACT). Circ Cardiovasc Qual 
Outcomes. 2014;7:15–24.
 8. Lamas GA, Anstrom KJ, Navas-Acien A, et al. The Trial to Assess Chelation 
Therapy 2 (TACT2): Rationale and design. Am Heart J. 2022;252:1–11.
5.1. Revascularization
 1. Spertus JA, Jones PG, Maron DJ, et al. Health-status outcomes with invasive 
or conservative care in coronary disease. N Engl J Med. 2020;382:1408–
1419.
 2. Xaplanteris P, Fournier S, Pijls NHJ, et al. Five-year outcomes with PCI 
guided by fractional flow reserve. N Engl J Med. 2018;379:250–259.
 3. Baron SJ, Chinnakondepalli K, Magnuson EA, et al. Quality-of-life after 
everolimus-eluting stents or bypass surgery for left-main disease: results 
from the EXCEL trial. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2017;70:3113–3122.
 4. Abdallah MS, Wang K, Magnuson EA, et al. Quality of life after PCI vs CABG 
among patients with diabetes and multivessel coronary artery disease: a 
randomized clinical trial. JAMA. 2013;310:1581–1590.
 5. Brooks MM, Chung SC, Helmy T, et al. Health status after treatment for 
coronary artery disease and type 2 diabetes mellitus in the Bypass An-
gioplasty Revascularization Investigation 2 Diabetes trial. Circulation. 
2010;122:1690–1699.
 6. Spertus JA, Maron DJ, Cohen DJ, et al. Frequency, predictors, and con-
sequences of crossing over to revascularization within 12 months of ran-
domization to optimal medical therapy in the Clinical Outcomes Utilizing 
Revascularization and Aggressive Drug Evaluation (COURAGE) trial. Circ 
Cardiovasc Qual Outcomes. 2013;6:409–418.
 7 . Al-Lamee RK, Shun-Shin MJ, Howard JP, et al. Dobutamine stress echo-
cardiography ischemia as a predictor of the placebo-controlled efficacy 
of percutaneous coronary intervention in stable coronary artery disease: 
the stress echocardiography-stratified analysis of ORBITA. Circulation. 
2019;140:1971–1980.
 8. Yusuf S, Zucker D, Peduzzi P, et al. Effect of coronary artery bypass graft 
surgery on survival: overview of 10-year results from randomised trials by 
the Coronary Artery Bypass Graft Surgery Trialists Collaboration. Lancet. 
1994;344:563–570.
 9. Chaitman BR, Fisher LD, Bourassa MG, et al. Effect of coronary bypass 
surgery on survival patterns in subsets of patients with left main coronary 
artery disease: report of the Collaborative Study in Coronary Artery Surgery 
(CASS). Am J Cardiol. 1981;48:765–777 .
 10. Velazquez EJ, Lee KL, Deja MA, et al. Coronary-artery bypass surgery in 
patients with left ventricular dysfunction. N Engl J Med. 2011;364:1607–
1616.
 11. Velazquez EJ, Lee KL, Jones RH, et al. Coronary-artery bypass surgery in 
patients with ischemic cardiomyopathy. N Engl J Med. 2016;374:1511–
1520. 12. Chew DS, Cowper PA, Al-Khalidi H, et al. Cost-effectiveness of coronary 
artery bypass surgery versus medicine in ischemic cardiomyopathy: the 
STICH randomized clinical trial. Circulation. 2022;145:819–828.
 13. Maron DJ, Hochman JS, Reynolds HR, et al. Initial invasive or conservative 
strategy for stable coronary disease. N Engl J Med. 2020;382:1395–1407 .
 14. Hueb W, Lopes N, Gersh BJ, et al. Ten-year follow-up survival of the Medi-
cine, Angioplasty, or Surgery Study (MASS II): a randomized controlled clini-
cal trial of 3 therapeutic strategies for multivessel coronary artery disease. 
Circulation. 2010;122:949–957 .
 15. Navarese EP, Lansky AJ, Kereiakes DJ, et al. Cardiac mortality in patients 
randomised to elective coronary revascularisation plus medical therapy or 
medical therapy alone: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Eur Heart J. 
2021;42:4638–4651.
 16. Chaitman BR, Alexander KP, Cyr DD, et al. Myocardial infarction in the 
ISCHEMIA trial: impact of different definitions on incidence, prognosis, and 
treatment comparisons. Circulation. 2021;143:790–804.
 17 . De Bruyne B, Fearon WF, Pijls NHJ, et al. Fractional flow reserve-guided 
PCI for stable coronary artery disease. N Engl J Med. 2014;371:1208–
1217 .
 18. De Bruyne B, Pijls NHJ, Kalesan B, et al. Fractional flow reserve-guided 
PCI versus medical therapy in stable coronary disease. N Engl J Med. 
2012;367:991–1001.
 19. Laukkanen JA, Kunutsor SK. Revascularization versus medical therapy for 
the treatment of stable coronary artery disease: a meta-analysis of contem-
porary randomized controlled trials. Int J Cardiol. 2021;324:13–21.
 20. Vij A, Kassab K, Chawla H, et al. Invasive therapy versus conservative 
therapy for patients with stable coronary artery disease: an updated meta-
analysis. Clin Cardiol. 2021;44:675–682.
 21. Bittl JA, He Y, Jacobs AK, et al. Bayesian methods affirm the use of percuta-
neous coronary intervention to improve survival in patients with unprotected 
left main coronary artery disease. Circulation. 2013;127:2177–2185.
 22. Davies JE, Sen S, Dehbi HM, et al. Use of the instantaneous wave-free ratio 
or fractional flow reserve in PCI. N Engl J Med. 2017;376:1824–1834.
 23. Tonino PA, De Bruyne B, Pijls NH, et al. Fractional flow reserve versus an-
giography for guiding percutaneous coronary intervention. N Engl J Med. 
2009;360:213–224.
 24. Fearon WF, Nishi T, De Bruyne B, et al. Clinical outcomes and cost-effective-
ness of fractional flow reserve-guided percutaneous coronary intervention 
in patients with stable coronary artery disease: three-year follow-up of the 
FAME 2 trial (Fractional Flow Reserve Versus Angiography for Multivessel 
Evaluation). Circulation. 2018;137:480–487 .
 25. Fearon WF, Bornschein B, Tonino PA, et al. Economic evaluation of frac-
tional flow reserve-guided percutaneous coronary intervention in patients 
with multivessel disease. Circulation. 2010;122:2545–2550.
 26. Chu D, Anastacio MM, Mulukutla SR, et al. Safety and efficacy of imple-
menting a multidisciplinary heart team approach for revascularization in pa-
tients with complex coronary artery disease: an observational cohort pilot 
study. JAMA Surg. 2014;149:1109–1112.
 27 . Serruys PW, Morice MC, Kappetein AP, et al. Percutaneous coronary inter-
vention versus coronary-artery bypass grafting for severe coronary artery 
disease. N Engl J Med. 2009;360:961–972.
 28. Pavlidis AN, Perera D, Karamasis GV, et al. Implementation and consistency 
of Heart Team decision-making in complex coronary revascularisation. Int J 
Cardiol. 2016;206:37–41.
 29. Sanchez CE, Dota A, Badhwar V, et al. Revascularization heart team rec-
ommendations as an adjunct to appropriate use criteria for coronary re-
vascularization in patients with complex coronary artery disease. Catheter 
Cardiovasc Interv. 2016;88:E103–E112.
 30. Lawton JS, Tamis-Holland JE, Bangalore S, et al. 2021 ACC/AHA/SCAI 
guideline for coronary artery revascularization: a report of the American Col-
lege of Cardiology/American Heart Association Joint Committee on Clinical 
Practice Guidelines. Circulation. 2022;145:e18–e114.
 31. De Bruyne B, Pijls NH, Kalesan B, et al. Fractional flow reserve-guided 
PCI versus medical therapy in stable coronary disease. N Engl J Med. 
2012;367:991–1001.
 32. Bangalore S, Maron DJ, O'Brien SM, et al. Management of coronary disease 
in patients with advanced kidney disease. N Engl J Med. 2020;382:1608–
1618.
 33. Bangalore S, Maron DJ, Stone GW, et al. Routine revascularization versus 
initial medical therapy for stable ischemic heart disease: a systematic review 
and meta-analysis of randomized trials. Circulation. 2020;142:841–857 .
 34. Nishi T, Piroth Z, De Bruyne B, et al. Fractional flow reserve and quality-of-
life improvement after percutaneous coronary intervention in patients with 
stable coronary artery disease. Circulation. 2018;138:1797–1804.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on November 12, 2025

CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINESAugust 29, 2023 Circulation. 2023;148:e9–e119. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000001168
Virani et al 2023 AHA/ACC/ACCP/ASPC/NLA/PCNA Chronic Coronary Disease Guideline e106 35. Hochman JS, Anthopolos R, Reynolds HR, et al. Survival after inva-
sive or conservative management of stable coronary disease. Circulation. 
2023;147:8–19.
 36. Kumbhani DJ, Nallamothu BK. PCI volume benchmarks: still adequate for 
quality assessment in 2017?. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2017;69:2925–2928.
 37 . Fearon WF, Zimmermann FM, De Bruyne B, et al. Fractional flow reserve-
guided PCI as compared with coronary bypass surgery. N Engl J Med. 
2022;386:128–137 .
 38. Wolff G, Dimitroulis D, Andreotti F, et al. Survival benefits of invasive ver-
sus conservative strategies in heart failure in patients with reduced ejec-
tion fraction and coronary artery disease: a meta-analysis. Circ Heart Fail. 
2017;10:e003255.
 39. Perera D, Clayton T, O'Kane PD, et al. Percutaneous revascularization for 
ischemic left ventricular dysfunction. N Engl J Med. 2022;387:1351–1360.
 40. Reynolds HR, Shaw LJ, Min JK, et al. Outcomes in the ISCHEMIA trial 
based on coronary artery disease and ischemia severity. Circulation. 
2021;144:1024–1038.
 41. Sidhu MS, Alexander KP, Huang Z, et al. Causes of cardiovascular and non-
cardiovascular death in the ISCHEMIA trial. Am Heart J. 2022;248:72–83.
 42. Makikallio T, Holm NR, Lindsay M, et al. Percutaneous coronary angioplasty 
versus coronary artery bypass grafting in treatment of unprotected left main 
stenosis (NOBLE): a prospective, randomised, open-label, non-inferiority 
trial. Lancet. 2016;388:2743–2752.
 43. Stone GW, Sabik JF, Serruys PW, et al. Everolimus-eluting stents or by-
pass surgery for left main coronary artery disease. N Engl J Med. 
2016;375:2223–2235.
 44. Park SJ, Kim YH, Park DW, et al. Randomized trial of stents versus by-
pass surgery for left main coronary artery disease. N Engl J Med. 
2011;364:1718–1727 .
 45. Morice MC, Serruys PW, Kappetein AP, et al. Outcomes in patients with 
de novo left main disease treated with either percutaneous coronary 
intervention using paclitaxel-eluting stents or coronary artery bypass 
graft treatment in the Synergy Between Percutaneous Coronary Inter-
vention with TAXUS and Cardiac Surgery (SYNTAX) trial. Circulation. 
2010;121:2645–2653.
 46. Morice M-C, Serruys PW, Kappetein AP, et al. Five-year outcomes in pa-
tients with left main disease treated with either percutaneous coronary 
intervention or coronary artery bypass grafting in the synergy between per-
cutaneous coronary intervention with taxus and cardiac surgery trial. Circu-
lation. 2014;129:2388–2394.
 47 . Holm NR, Makikallio T, Lindsay MM, et al. Percutaneous coronary angio-
plasty versus coronary artery bypass grafting in the treatment of unpro-
tected left main stenosis: updated 5-year outcomes from the randomised, 
non-inferiority NOBLE trial. Lancet. 2020;395:191–199.
 48. Kuno T, Ueyama H, Rao SV, et al. Percutaneous coronary intervention or 
coronary artery bypass graft surgery for left main coronary artery disease: a 
meta-analysis of randomized trials. Am Heart J. 2020;227:9–10.
 49. Park D-W, Ahn J-M, Park H, et al. Ten-year outcomes after drug-eluting 
stents versus coronary artery bypass grafting for left main coronary disease: 
extended follow-up of the PRECOMBAT trial. Circulation. 2020;141:1437–
1446.
 50. Ahmad Y, Howard JP, Arnold AD, et al. Mortality after drug-eluting stents 
vs. coronary artery bypass grafting for left main coronary artery disease: a 
meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials. Eur Heart J. 2020;41:3228–
3235.
 51. Gallo M, Blitzer D, Laforgia PL, et al. Percutaneous coronary interven-
tion versus coronary artery bypass graft for left main coronary artery 
disease: a meta-analysis. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 2020;S0022–
5223(0020)30888-30886.
 52. Lee PH, Ahn J-M, Chang M, et al. Left main coronary artery disease: secular 
trends in patient characteristics, treatments, and outcomes. J Am Coll Car-
diol. 2016;68:1233–1246.
 53. Chen SL, Zhang JJ, Han Y, et al. Double Kissing Crush Versus Provisional 
Stenting for Left Main Distal Bifurcation Lesions: DKCRUSH-V Random-
ized Trial. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2017;70:2605–2617 .
 54. Chen SL, Xu B, Han YL, et al. Clinical outcome after DK crush ver-
sus culotte stenting of distal left main bifurcation lesions: the 3-year 
follow-up results of the DKCRUSH-III study. JACC Cardiovasc Interv. 
2015;8:1335–1342.
 55. Park SJ, Kim YH, Park DW, et al. Impact of intravascular ultrasound guid-
ance on long-term mortality in stenting for unprotected left main coronary 
artery stenosis. Circ Cardiovasc Interv. 2009;2:167–177 .
 56. Gotberg M, Christiansen EH, Gudmundsdottir IJ, et al. Instantaneous 
wave-free ratio versus fractional flow reserve to guide PCI. N Engl J Med. 
2017;376:1813–1823. 57 . Pijls NH, van Schaardenburgh P, Manoharan G, et al. Percutaneous coronary 
intervention of functionally nonsignificant stenosis: 5-year follow-up of the 
DEFER Study. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2007;49:2105–2111.
 58. Escaned J, Ryan N, Mejia-Renteria H, et al. Safety of the deferral of coro-
nary revascularization on the basis of instantaneous wave-free ratio and 
fractional flow reserve measurements in stable coronary artery disease and 
acute coronary syndromes. J Am Coll Cardiol Intv. 2018;11:1437–1449.
 59. Kogame N, Chichareon P, De Wilder K, et al. Clinical relevance of ticagrelor 
monotherapy following 1-month dual antiplatelet therapy after bifurcation 
percutaneous coronary intervention: Insight from GLOBAL LEADERS trial. 
Catheter Cardiovasc Interv. 2020;96:100–111.
 60. Fearon WF, Nishi T, De Bruyne B, et al. Clinical outcomes and cost-effective-
ness of fractional flow reserve-guided percutaneous coronary intervention 
in patients with stable coronary artery disease: three-year follow-up of the 
FAME 2 trial (Fractional Flow Reserve Versus Angiography for Multivessel 
Evaluation). Circulation. 2018;137:480–487 .
 61. Berntorp K, Persson J, Koul SM, et al. Instantaneous wave-free ratio com-
pared with fractional flow reserve in PCI: a cost-minimization analysis. Int J 
Cardiol. 2021;344:54–59.
5.2. Revascularization: PCI Versus CABG
 1. Mohr FW, Morice M-C, Kappetein AP, et al. Coronary artery bypass graft 
surgery versus percutaneous coronary intervention in patients with three-
vessel disease and left main coronary disease: 5-year follow-up of the ran-
domised, clinical SYNTAX trial. Lancet. 2013;381:629–638.
 2. Morice M-C, Serruys PW, Kappetein AP, et al. Five-year outcomes in pa-
tients with left main disease treated with either percutaneous coronary 
intervention or coronary artery bypass grafting in the synergy between per-
cutaneous coronary intervention with taxus and cardiac surgery trial. Circu-
lation. 2014;129:2388–2394.
 3. Serruys PW, Morice M-C, Kappetein AP, et al. Percutaneous coronary inter-
vention versus coronary-artery bypass grafting for severe coronary artery 
disease. N Engl J Med. 2009;360:961–972.
 4. Thuijs DJFM, Kappetein AP, Serruys PW, et al. Percutaneous coronary inter-
vention versus coronary artery bypass grafting in patients with three-vessel 
or left main coronary artery disease: 10-year follow-up of the multicentre 
randomised controlled SYNTAX trial. Lancet. 2019;394:1325–1334.
 5. Head SJ, Milojevic M, Daemen J, et al. Mortality after coronary artery by-
pass grafting versus percutaneous coronary intervention with stenting for 
coronary artery disease: a pooled analysis of individual patient data. Lancet. 
2018;391:939–948.
 6. Fearon WF, Zimmermann FM, De Bruyne B, et al. Fractional flow reserve-
guided PCI as compared with coronary bypass surgery. N Engl J Med. 
2022;386:128–137 .
 7 . Ono M, Serruys PW, Garg S, et al. Effect of patient-reported pre-procedural 
physical and mental health on 10-year mortality after percutaneous or sur-
gical coronary revascularization. Circulation. 2022;146:1268–1280.
 8. Head SJ, Holmes DR Jr, Mack MJ, et al. Risk profile and 3-year outcomes 
from the SYNTAX percutaneous coronary intervention and coronary artery 
bypass grafting nested registries. J Am Coll Cardiol Intv. 2012;5:618–625.
 9. Salisbury AC, Kirtane AJ, Ali ZA, et al. The Outcomes of Percutaneous Re-
vascularizaTIon for Management of SUrgically Ineligible Patients With Multi-
vessel or Left Main Coronary Artery Disease (OPTIMUM) registry: rationale 
and design. Cardiovasc Revasc Med. 2022;41:83–91.
 10. Farkouh ME, Domanski M, Sleeper LA, et al. Strategies for multivessel re-
vascularization in patients with diabetes. N Engl J Med. 2012;367:2375–
2384.
 11. Farkouh ME, Domanski M, Dangas GD, et al. Long-term survival follow-
ing multivessel revascularization in patients with diabetes: the FREEDOM 
follow-on study. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2019;73:629–638.
 12. Kamalesh M, Sharp TG, Tang XC, et al. Percutaneous coronary intervention 
versus coronary bypass surgery in United States veterans with diabetes. J 
Am Coll Cardiol. 2013;61:808–816.
 13. Kappetein AP, Head SJ, Morice M-C, et al. Treatment of complex coronary 
artery disease in patients with diabetes: 5-year results comparing outcomes 
of bypass surgery and percutaneous coronary intervention in the SYNTAX 
trial. Eur J Cardiothorac Surg. 2013;43:1006–1013.
 14. Verma S, Farkouh ME, Yanagawa B, et al. Comparison of coronary artery 
bypass surgery and percutaneous coronary intervention in patients with 
diabetes: a meta-analysis of randomised controlled trials. Lancet Diabetes 
Endocrinol. 2013;1:317–328.
 15. Park S-J, Ahn J-M, Kim Y-H, et al. Trial of everolimus-eluting stents or by-
pass surgery for coronary disease. N Engl J Med. 2015;372:1204–1212.
 16. Park D-W, Kim Y-H, Song HG, et al. Long-term outcome of stents versus 
bypass surgery in diabetic and nondiabetic patients with multivessel or left 
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on November 12, 2025

CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINESCirculation. 2023;148:e9–e119. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000001168 August 29, 2023
Virani et al 2023 AHA/ACC/ACCP/ASPC/NLA/PCNA Chronic Coronary Disease Guideline e107main coronary artery disease: a pooled analysis of 5775 individual patient 
data. Circ Cardiovasc Interv. 2012;5:467–475.
 17 . Mancini GB, Farkouh ME, Brooks MM, et al. Medical treatment and revas-
cularization options in patients with type 2 diabetes and coronary disease. J 
Am Coll Cardiol. 2016;68:985–995.
 18. Milojevic M, Serruys PW, Sabik JF 3rd, et al. Bypass surgery or stenting for 
left main coronary artery disease in patients with diabetes. J Am Coll Cardiol. 
2019;73:1616–1628.
 19. Lawton JS, Tamis-Holland JE, Bangalore S, et al. 2021 ACC/AHA/SCAI 
guideline for coronary artery revascularization: a report of the American Col-
lege of Cardiology/American Heart Association Joint Committee on Clinical 
Practice Guidelines. Circulation. 2022;145:e18–e114.
 20. Doenst T, Haverich A, Serruys P, et al. PCI and CABG for treating stable 
coronary artery disease: JACC review topic of the week. J Am Coll Cardiol. 
2019;73:964–976.
 21. Makikallio T, Holm NR, Lindsay M, et al. Percutaneous coronary angioplasty 
versus coronary artery bypass grafting in treatment of unprotected left main 
stenosis (NOBLE): a prospective, randomised, open-label, non-inferiority 
trial. Lancet. 2016;388:2743–2752.
 22. Gallo M, Blitzer D, Laforgia PL, et al. Percutaneous coronary interven-
tion versus coronary artery bypass graft for left main coronary artery 
disease: a meta-analysis. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 2020;S0022–
5223(0020)30888-30886.
 23. Hueb W, Lopes N, Gersh BJ, et al. Ten-year follow-up survival of the Medi-
cine, Angioplasty, or Surgery Study (MASS II): a randomized controlled clini-
cal trial of 3 therapeutic strategies for multivessel coronary artery disease. 
Circulation. 2010;122:949–957 .
 24. Lee KM, Kim MH, Choi SY, et al. Twelve versus 30 month dual anti-
platelet therapy after percutaneous coronary intervention using national 
health insurance review & assessment (HIRA) database. Eur Heart J. 
2016;37:667 .
 25. Gaudino M, Hameed I, Farkouh ME, et al. Overall and cause-specific 
mortality in randomized clinical trials comparing percutaneous interven-
tions with coronary bypass surgery: a meta-analysis. JAMA Intern Med. 
2020;180:1638–1646.
 26. Cavalcante R, Sotomi Y, Lee CW, et al. Outcomes after percutaneous coro-
nary intervention or bypass surgery in patients with unprotected left main 
disease. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2016;68:999–1009.
 27 . Stone GW, Sabik JF, Serruys PW, et al. Everolimus-eluting stents or by-
pass surgery for left main coronary artery disease. N Engl J Med. 
2016;375:2223–2235.
6.1.1. Chronic Management After SCAD
 1. Saw J, Humphries K, Aymong E, et al. Spontaneous coronary artery dis-
section: clinical outcomes and risk of recurrence. J Am Coll Cardiol. 
2017;70:1148–1158.
 2. Saw J, Starovoytov A, Humphries K, et al. Canadian spontaneous coronary 
artery dissection cohort study: in-hospital and 30-day outcomes. Eur Heart 
J. 2019;40:1188–1197 .
 3. Kok SN, Hayes SN, Cutrer FM, et al. Prevalence and clinical factors of mi-
graine in patients with spontaneous coronary artery dissection. J Am Heart 
Assoc. 2018;7:e010140.
 4. Clare R, Duan L, Phan D, et al. Characteristics and clinical outcomes of 
patients with spontaneous coronary artery dissection. J Am Heart Assoc. 
2019;8:e012570.
 5. Lettieri C, Zavalloni D, Rossini R, et al. Management and long-term progno-
sis of spontaneous coronary artery dissection. Am J Cardiol. 2015;116:66–
73.
 6. Nakashima T, Noguchi T, Haruta S, et al. Prognostic impact of spontaneous 
coronary artery dissection in young female patients with acute myocardial 
infarction: a report from the Angina Pectoris-Myocardial Infarction Multi-
center Investigators in Japan. Int J Cardiol. 2016;207:341–348.
 7 . Tweet MS, Eleid MF, Best PJ, et al. Spontaneous coronary artery dissec-
tion: revascularization versus conservative therapy. Circ Cardiovasc Interv. 
2014;7:777–786.
 8. Rogowski S, Maeder MT, Weilenmann D, et al. Spontaneous coronary ar-
tery dissection: angiographic follow-up and long-term clinical outcome in 
a predominantly medically treated population. Catheter Cardiovasc Interv. 
2017;89:59–68.
 9. Lobo AS, Cantu SM, Sharkey SW, et al. Revascularization in patients with 
spontaneous coronary artery dissection and ST-segment elevation myocar-
dial infarction. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2019;74:1290–1300.
 10. Eleid MF, Guddeti RR, Tweet MS, et al. Coronary artery tortuosity in sponta-
neous coronary artery dissection: angiographic characteristics and clinical 
implications. Circ Cardiovasc Interv. 2014;7:656–662. 11. Tweet MS, Olin JW. Insights into spontaneous coronary artery dissection: 
can recurrence be prevented?. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2017;70:1159–1161.
 12. Tweet MS, Young KA, Best PJM, et al. Association of pregnancy with recur-
rence of spontaneous coronary artery dissection among women with prior 
coronary artery dissection. JAMA Netw Open. 2020;3:e2018170.
 13. Benson JC, Lehman VT, Verdoorn JT, et al. Prevalence of cervical artery 
abnormalities on CTA in patients with spontaneous coronary artery dissec-
tion: fibromuscular dysplasia, dissection, aneurysm, and tortuosity. AJNR Am 
J Neuroradiol. 2021;42:1497–1502.
 14. Sharma S, Kaadan MI, Duran JM, et al. Risk factors, imaging findings, and 
sex differences in spontaneous coronary artery dissection. Am J Cardiol. 
2019;123:1783–1787 .
 15. Prasad M, Tweet MS, Hayes SN, et al. Prevalence of extracoronary vascu-
lar abnormalities and fibromuscular dysplasia in patients with spontaneous 
coronary artery dissection. Am J Cardiol. 2015;115:1672–1677 .
 16. Hayes SN, Kim ESH, Saw J, et al. Spontaneous coronary artery dissection: 
current state of the science: a scientific statement from the American Heart 
Association. Circulation. 2018;137:e523–e557 .
 17 . Hayes SN, Tweet MS, Adlam D, et al. Spontaneous coronary artery dissec-
tion: JACC state-of-the-art review. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2020;76:961–984.
 18. Krittanawong C, Tweet MS, Hayes SE, et al. Usefulness of cardiac re-
habilitation after spontaneous coronary artery dissection. Am J Cardiol. 
2016;117:1604–1609.
 19. Chou AY, Prakash R, Rajala J, et al. The first dedicated cardiac rehabilitation 
program for patients with spontaneous coronary artery dissection: descrip-
tion and initial results. Can J Cardiol. 2016;32:554–560.
 20. Imran H, Gaw A, Stabile L, et al. Safety and outcomes of cardiac rehabilita-
tion for patients with spontaneous coronary artery dissection. J Rehabil Med 
Clin Commun. 2018;1:1000001.
 21. Silber TC, Tweet MS, Bowman MJ, et al. Cardiac rehabilitation after sponta-
neous coronary artery dissection. J Cardiopulm Rehabil Prev. 2015;35:328–
333.
 22. Waterbury TM, Tweet MS, Hayes SN, et al. Early natural history of spontane-
ous coronary artery dissection. Circ Cardiovasc Interv. 2018;11:e006772.
 23. Alfonso F, de la Torre Hernandez JM, Ibanez B, et al. Rationale and design 
of the BA-SCAD (Beta-blockers and Antiplatelet agents in patients with 
Spontaneous Coronary Artery Dissection) randomized clinical trial. Rev Esp 
Cardiol (Engl Ed). 2022;75:515–522.
 24. ClinicalTrials.gov. Accessed November 8, 2021. https://clinicaltrials.gov/
ct2/search/advanced.
6.1.2. Ischemia With Nonobstructive Coronary Arteries
 1. Ford T J, Stanley B, Good R, et al. Stratified medical therapy using invasive 
coronary function testing in angina: the CorMicA trial. J Am Coll Cardiol. 
2018;72:2841–2855.
 2. Ford T J, Stanley B, Sidik N, et al. 1-year outcomes of angina management 
guided by invasive coronary function testing (CorMicA). J Am Coll Cardiol 
Intv. 2020;13:33–45.
 3. Patel MR, Dai D, Hernandez AF, et al. Prevalence and predictors of non-
obstructive coronary artery disease identified with coronary angiography in 
contemporary clinical practice. Am Heart J. 2014;167:846–852, e842.
 4. Maddox TM, Stanislawski MA, Grunwald GK, et al. Nonobstructive coronary 
artery disease and risk of myocardial infarction. JAMA. 2014;312:1754–
1763.
 5. Jespersen L, Hvelplund A, Abildstrom SZ, et al. Stable angina pectoris with 
no obstructive coronary artery disease is associated with increased risks of 
major adverse cardiovascular events. Eur Heart J. 2012;33:734–744.
 6. Kunadian V, Chieffo A, Camici PG, et al. An EAPCI expert consensus docu-
ment on ischaemia with non-obstructive coronary arteries. Developed in col-
laboration with European Society of Cardiology Working Group on Coronary 
Pathophysiology & Microcirculation. EuroIntervention. 2021;16:1049–1069.
 7 . Ong P, Camici PG, Beltrame JF, et al. International standardization of diag-
nostic criteria for microvascular angina. Int J Cardiol. 2018;250:16–20.
 8. Beltrame JF, Crea F, Kaski JC, et al. International standardization of diag-
nostic criteria for vasospastic angina. Eur Heart J. 2017;38:2565–2568.
 9. Gulati M, Levy PD, Mukherjee D, et al. 2021 AHA/ACC/ASE/CHEST/
SAEM/SCCT/SCMR guideline for the evaluation and diagnosis of chest 
pain: a report of the American College of Cardiology/American Heart 
Association Joint Committee on Clinical Practice Guidelines. Circulation. 
2021;144:e368–e454.
6.1.3. HF With Preserved or Reduced Ejection Fraction
 1. Lloyd-Jones DM, Larson MG, Leip EP, et al. Lifetime risk for develop-
ing congestive heart failure: the Framingham Heart Study. Circulation. 
2002;106:3068–3072.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on November 12, 2025

CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINESAugust 29, 2023 Circulation. 2023;148:e9–e119. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000001168
Virani et al 2023 AHA/ACC/ACCP/ASPC/NLA/PCNA Chronic Coronary Disease Guideline e108 2. Khatibzadeh S, Farzadfar F, Oliver J, et al. Worldwide risk factors for 
heart failure: a systematic review and pooled analysis. Int J Cardiol. 
2013;168:1186–1194.
 3. Lawton JS, Tamis-Holland JE, Bangalore S, et al. 2021 ACC/AHA/SCAI 
guideline for coronary artery revascularization: a report of the American Col-
lege of Cardiology/American Heart Association Joint Committee on Clinical 
Practice Guidelines. Circulation. 2022;145:e18–e114.
 4. Maddox TM, Januzzi JL Jr, Allen LA, et al. 2021 Update to the 2017 ACC 
expert consensus decision pathway for optimization of heart failure treat-
ment: answers to 10 pivotal issues about heart failure with reduced ejection 
fraction: a report of the American College of Cardiology Solution Set Over-
sight Committee. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2021;77:772–810.
 5. Heidenreich PA, Bozkurt B, Aguilar D, et al. 2022 AHA/ACC/HFSA guide-
line for the management of heart failure: a report of the American College of 
Cardiology/American Heart Association Joint Committee on Clinical Prac-
tice Guidelines. Circulation. 2022;145:e895–e1032.
6.2. CAD With Valvular Heart Disease
 1. Rapp AH, Hillis LD, Lange RA, et al. Prevalence of coronary artery disease in 
patients with aortic stenosis with and without angina pectoris. Am J Cardiol. 
2001;87:1216–1217 .
 2. Emren ZY, Emren SV, Kilicaslan B, et al. Evaluation of the prevalence of 
coronary artery disease in patients with valvular heart disease. J Cardiotho-
rac Surg. 2014;9:153.
 3. Otto CM, Nishimura RA, Bonow RO, et al. 2020 ACC/AHA guideline for the 
management of patients with valvular heart disease: a report of the Ameri-
can College of Cardiology/American Heart Association Joint Committee on 
Clinical Practice Guidelines. Circulation. 2021;143:e72–e227 .
 4. Lawton JS, Tamis-Holland JE, et al. 2021 ACC/AHA/SCAI guideline for 
coronary artery revascularization: a report of the American College of Car-
diology/American Heart Association Joint Committee on Clinical Practice 
Guidelines. Circulation. 2022;145:e18–e114.
6.3. Young Adults
 1. Collet JP, Zeitouni M, Procopi N, et al. Long-term evolution of premature 
coronary artery disease. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2019;74:1868–1878.
 2. Mahtta D, Ramsey D, Krittanawong C, et al. Recreational substance use 
among patients with premature atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease. 
Heart. 2021;107:650–656.
 3. Singh A, Gupta A, Collins BL, et al. Familial hypercholesterolemia among 
young adults with myocardial infarction. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2019;73:2439–
2450.
 4. Cole JH, Miller Sperling JILS 3rd, et al. Long-term follow-up of coronary 
artery disease presenting in young adults. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2003;41:521–
528.
 5. Navas-Nacher EL, Colangelo L, Beam C, et al. Risk factors for coronary heart 
disease in men 18 to 39 years of age. Ann Intern Med. 2001;134:433–439.
 6. Khawaja FJ, Rihal CS, Lennon RJ, et al. Temporal trends (over 30 years), clinical 
characteristics, outcomes, and gender in patients </=50 years of age having 
percutaneous coronary intervention. Am J Cardiol. 2011;107:668–674.
 7 . Konishi H, Miyauchi K, Kasai T, et al. Long-term prognosis and clinical char-
acteristics of young adults (</=40 years old) who underwent percutaneous 
coronary intervention. J Cardiol. 2014;64:171–174.
 8. Tini G, Proietti G, Casenghi M, et al. Long-term outcome of acute coro-
nary syndromes in young patients. High Blood Press Cardiovasc Prev. 
2017;24:77–84.
 9. Luirink IK, Wiegman A, Kusters DM, et al. 20-year follow-up of statins in 
children with familial hypercholesterolemia. N Engl J Med. 2019;381:1547–
1556.
 10. Keenan J. Improving adherence to medication for secondary cardiovascular 
disease prevention. Eur J Prev Cardiol. 2017;24:29–35.
 11. Mahtta D, Ramsey DJ, Al Rifai M, et al. Evaluation of aspirin and statin 
therapy use and adherence in patients with premature atherosclerotic car-
diovascular disease. JAMA Network Open. 2020;3:e2011051.
 12. Young ML, McLeary M, Chan KC. Acquired and congenital coronary artery 
abnormalities. Cardiol Young. 2017;27:S31–S35.
 13. McCrindle BW, Rowley AH, Newburger JW, et al. Diagnosis, treatment, 
and long-term management of Kawasaki disease: a scientific statement 
for health professionals from the American Heart Association. Circulation. 
2017;135:e927–e999.
 14. Angelini P, Velasco JA, Flamm S. Coronary anomalies: incidence, patho-
physiology, and clinical relevance. Circulation. 2002;105:2449–2454.
 15. Yang J, Biery DW, Singh A, et al. Risk factors and outcomes of very young 
adults who experience myocardial infarction: the partners YOUNG-MI reg-
istry. Am J Med. 2020;133:605–612.e1. 16. Lee JL, Sinnathurai P, Buchbinder R, et al. Biologics and cardiovascular 
events in inflammatory arthritis: a prospective national cohort study. Arthritis 
Res Ther. 2018;20:171.
 17 . Tsai MS, Lin CL, Chen HP, et al. Long-term risk of acute coronary syndrome 
in patients with inflammatory bowel disease: a 13-year nationwide cohort 
study in an Asian population. Inflamm Bowel Dis. 2014;20:502–507 .
 18. Mahtta D, Khalid U, Misra A, et al. Premature atherosclerotic cardiovascular 
disease: what have we learned recently?. Curr Atheroscler Rep. 2020;22:44.
6.4. Cancer
 1. Canale ML, Turazza F, Lestuzzi C, et al. Portrait of Italian cardio-oncology: re-
sults of a Nationwide Associazione Nazionale Medici Cardiologi Ospedalieri 
(ANMCO) survey cardiovascular disease-specific mortality in 270 618 pa-
tients with non-small cell lung cancer. Front Cardiovasc Med. 2021;8:677544.
 2. Gilchrist SC, Barac A, Ades PA, et al. Cardio-oncology rehabilitation to 
manage cardiovascular outcomes in cancer patients and survivors: a 
scientific statement from the American Heart Association. Circulation. 
2019;139:e997–e1012.
 3. Narayan V, Thompson EW, Demissei B, et al. Mechanistic biomarkers infor-
mative of both cancer and cardiovascular disease: JACC state-of-the-art 
review. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2020;75:2726–2737 .
 4. Leiva O, AbdelHameid D, Connors JM, et al. Common pathophysiology in 
cancer, atrial fibrillation, atherosclerosis, and thrombosis: JACC: cardioon-
cology state-of-the-art review. JACC CardioOncol. 2021;3:619–634.
 5. Mitchell JD, Cehic DA, Morgia M, et al. Cardiovascular manifestations 
from therapeutic radiation: a multidisciplinary expert consensus state-
ment from the International Cardio-Oncology Society. JACC CardioOncol. 
2021;3:360–380.
 6. Dagenais GR, Leong DP, Rangarajan S, et al. Variations in common dis-
eases, hospital admissions, and deaths in middle-aged adults in 21 coun-
tries from five continents (PURE): a prospective cohort study. Lancet. 
2020;395:785–794.
 7 . Lau ES, Paniagua SM, Liu E, et al. Cardiovascular risk factors are associated 
with future cancer. JACC CardioOncol. 2021;3:48–58.
 8. Howlader N, Forjaz G, Mooradian MJ, et al. The effect of advances in lung-
cancer treatment on population mortality. N Engl J Med. 2020;383:640–
649.
 9. Herrmann J, Yang EH, Iliescu CA, et al. Vascular toxicities of cancer thera-
pies: the old and the new-an evolving avenue. Circulation. 2016;133:1272–
1289.
 10. Narayan V, Ross AE, Parikh RB, et al. How to treat prostate cancer with an-
drogen deprivation and minimize cardiovascular risk: a therapeutic tightrope. 
JACC CardioOncol. 2021;3:737–741.
 11. Beavers CJ, Rodgers JE, Bagnola AJ, et al. Cardio-oncology drug interac-
tions: a scientific statement from the American Heart Association. Circula-
tion. 2022;145:e811–e838.
 12. Zhang Y, Zhang Z, Liu Y, et al. Cardio-oncology in China: we are on the go!. 
JACC CardioOncol 2020;139–143.
 13. Curigliano G, de Azambuja E, Lenihan D, et al. Prevention, monitoring, and 
management of cardiac dysfunction in patients with metastatic breast can-
cer. Oncologist. 2019;24:e1034–e1043.
 14. Key NS, Khorana AA, Kuderer NM, et al. Venous thromboembolism prophy-
laxis and treatment in patients with cancer: ASCO Clinical Practice Guide-
line Update. J Clin Oncol. 2020;38:496–520.
6.5. Women, Including Pregnancy and Postmenopausal 
Hormone Therapy
 1. Lameijer H, Burchill LJ, Baris L, et al. Pregnancy in women with pre-existent 
ischaemic heart disease: a systematic review with individualised patient 
data. Heart. 2019;105:873–880.
 2. Park K, Bairey Merz CN, Bello NA, et al. Management of women with ac-
quired cardiovascular disease from pre-conception through pregnancy and 
postpartum: JACC Focus Seminar 3/5. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2021;77:1799–
1812.
 3. Silversides CK, Grewal J, Mason J, et al. Pregnancy outcomes in women with 
heart disease: the CARPREG II study. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2018;71:2419–
2430.
 4. Cauldwell M, Steer PJ, von Klemperer K, et al. Maternal and neona-
tal outcomes in women with history of coronary artery disease. Heart. 
2020;106:380–386.
 5. Lindley KJ, Bairey Merz CN, Davis MB, et al. Contraception and reproductive 
planning for women with cardiovascular disease: JACC Focus Seminar 5/5. 
J Am Coll Cardiol. 2021;77:1823–1834.
 6. Statins: drug safety communication-FDA requests removal of strongest 
warning against using cholesterol-lowering statins during pregnancy. US 
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on November 12, 2025

CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINESCirculation. 2023;148:e9–e119. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000001168 August 29, 2023
Virani et al 2023 AHA/ACC/ACCP/ASPC/NLA/PCNA Chronic Coronary Disease Guideline e109Food and Drug Administration (FDA). Published online July 20, 2021. 
Accessed October 30, 2021. https://www.fda.gov/safety/medical-prod-
uct-safety-information/statins-drug-safety-communication-fda-requests-
removal-strongest-warning-against-using-cholesterol.
 7 . Halpern DG, Weinberg CR, Pinnelas R, et al. Use of medication for cardio-
vascular disease during pregnancy: JACC state-of-the-art review. J Am Coll 
Cardiol. 2019;73:457–476.
 8. Bowen ME, Ray WA, Arbogast PG, et al. Increasing exposure to angio-
tensin-converting enzyme inhibitors in pregnancy. Am J Obstet Gynecol. 
2008;198:e291–e295.
 9. Hulley S, Grady D, Bush T, et al. Randomized trial of estrogen plus proges-
tin for secondary prevention of coronary heart disease in postmenopausal 
women. Heart and Estrogen/progestin Replacement Study (HERS) Re-
search Group. JAMA. 1998;280:605–613.
 10. Grady D, Herrington D, Bittner V, et al. Cardiovascular disease outcomes 
during 6.8 years of hormone therapy: Heart and Estrogen/progestin Re-
placement Study follow-up (HERS II). JAMA. 2002;288:49–57 .
 11. Boardman HM, Hartley L, Eisinga A, et al. Hormone therapy for prevent-
ing cardiovascular disease in post-menopausal women. Cochrane Database 
Syst Rev. 2015;3:CD002229.
 12. Roos-Hesselink JW, Ruys TP, Stein JI, et al. Outcome of pregnancy in pa-
tients with structural or ischaemic heart disease: results of a registry of the 
European Society of Cardiology. Eur Heart J. 2013;34:657–665.
 13. Magun E, DeFilippis EM, Noble S, et al. Cardiovascular care for pregnant 
women with cardiovascular disease. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2020;76:2102–
2113.
 14. Siu SC, Lee DS, Rashid M, et al. Long-term cardiovascular outcomes 
after pregnancy in women with heart disease. J Am Heart Assoc. 
2021;10:e020584.
 15. Mehta LS, Warnes CA, Bradley E, et al. Cardiovascular considerations in 
caring for pregnant patients: a scientific statement from the American Heart 
Association. Circulation. 2020;141:e884–e903.
 16. Davis MB, Arendt K, Bello NA, et al. Team-based care of women with cardio-
vascular disease from pre-conception through pregnancy and postpartum: 
JACC Focus Seminar 1/5. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2021;77:1763–1777 .
 17 . Herrington DM, Reboussin DM, Brosnihan KB, et al. Effects of estrogen 
replacement on the progression of coronary-artery atherosclerosis. N Engl J 
Med. 2000;343:522–529.
 18. Hodis HN, Mack WJ, Azen SP, et al. Hormone therapy and the progression 
of coronary-artery atherosclerosis in postmenopausal women. N Engl J Med. 
2003;349:535–545.
 19. Waters DD, Alderman EL, Hsia J, et al. Effects of hormone replacement 
therapy and antioxidant vitamin supplements on coronary atheroscle-
rosis in postmenopausal women: a randomized controlled trial. JAMA. 
2002;288:2432–2440.
 20. Ouyang P, Tardif JC, Herrington DM, et al. Randomized trial of hormone ther-
apy in women after coronary bypass surgery. Evidence of differential effect 
of hormone therapy on angiographic progression of disease in saphenous 
vein grafts and native coronary arteries. Atherosclerosis. 2006;189:375–
386.
 21. Hall G, Pripp U, Schenck-Gustafsson K, et al. Long-term effects of hor-
mone replacement therapy on symptoms of angina pectoris, quality of 
life and compliance in women with coronary artery disease. Maturitas. 
1998;28:235–242.
 22. Viscoli CM, Brass LM, Kernan WN, et al. A clinical trial of estrogen-replace-
ment therapy after ischemic stroke. N Engl J Med. 2001;345:1243–1249.
 23. Cherry N, Gilmour K, Hannaford P, et al. Oestrogen therapy for prevention 
of reinfarction in postmenopausal women: a randomised placebo controlled 
trial. Lancet. 2002;360:2001–2008.
 24. Bateman BT, Hernandez-Diaz S, Fischer MA, et al. Statins and congenital 
malformations: cohort study. BMJ. 2015;350:h1035.
 25. Zarek J, Koren G. The fetal safety of statins: a systematic review and meta-
analysis. J Obstet Gynaecol Can. 2014;36:506–509.
 26. McGrogan A, Snowball J, Charlton RA. Statins during pregnancy: a cohort 
study using the General Practice Research Database to investigate preg-
nancy loss. Pharmacoepidemiol Drug Saf. 2017;26:843–852.
 27 . Graham DF, Raal FJ. Management of familial hypercholesterolemia in preg-
nancy. Curr Opin Lipidol. 2021;32:370–377 .
 28. Hoibraaten E, Os I, Seljeflot I, et al. The effects of hormone replacement 
therapy on hemostatic variables in women with angiographically verified 
coronary artery disease: results from the estrogen in women with athero-
sclerosis study. Thromb Res. 2000;98:19–27 .
 29. Abou-Ismail MY, Citla Sridhar D, Nayak L. Estrogen and thrombosis: a bench 
to bedside review. Thromb Res. 2020;192:40–51. 30. Bergendal A, Persson I, Odeberg J, et al. Association of venous thromboem-
bolism with hormonal contraception and thrombophilic genotypes. Obstet 
Gynecol. 2014;124:600–609.
 31. Mantha S, Karp R, Raghavan V, et al. Assessing the risk of venous throm-
boembolic events in women taking progestin-only contraception: a meta-
analysis. BMJ. 2012;345:e4944.
 32. Connelly PJ, Marie Freel E, Perry C, et al. Gender-affirming hormone therapy, 
vascular health and cardiovascular disease in transgender adults. Hyperten-
sion. 2019;74:1266–1274.
6.6. Older Adults
 1. Rich MW, Chyun DA, Skolnick AH, et al. Knowledge gaps in cardiovascular 
care of the older adult population: a scientific statement from the American 
Heart Association, American College of Cardiology, and American Geriatrics 
Society. Circulation. 2016;133:2103–2122.
 2. Madhavan MV, Gersh BJ, Alexander KP, et al. Coronary artery disease in 
patients >/=80 years of age. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2018;71:2015–2040.
 3. Rittger H, Frosch B, Vitali-Serdoz L, et al. Differences of patients' percep-
tions for elective diagnostic coronary angiography and percutaneous cor-
onary intervention in stable coronary artery disease between elderly and 
younger patients. Clin Interv Aging. 2018;13:1935–1943.
 4. Pilotto A, Gallina P, Panza F, et al. Relation of statin use and mortality in 
community-dwelling frail older patients with coronary artery disease. Am J 
Cardiol. 2016;118:1624–1630.
 5. Ponce OJ, Larrea-Mantilla L, Hemmingsen B, et al. Lipid-lowering agents 
in older individuals: a systematic review and meta-analysis of randomized 
clinical trials. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2019;104:1585–1594.
 6. Rothschild DP, Novak E, Rich MW. Effect of statin therapy on mortality in 
older adults hospitalized with coronary artery disease: a propensity-adjusted 
analysis. J Am Geriatr Soc. 2016;64:1475–1479.
 7 . Tao T, Wang H, Wang SX, et al. Long-term outcomes of high-risk elderly 
male patients with multivessel coronary disease: optimal medical therapy 
versus revascularization. J Geriatr Cardiol. 2016;13:152–157 .
 8. Yan BP, Chan LL Y, Lee VWY, et al. Sustained 3-year benefits in quality of 
life after percutaneous coronary interventions in the elderly: a prospective 
cohort study. Value Health. 2018;21:423–431.
 9. Bogana Shanmugam V, Wong DT, Rashid H, et al. Bleeding outcomes after 
non-emergency percutaneous coronary intervention in the very elderly. J 
Geriatr Cardiol. 2017;14:624–631.
 10. Sawant AC, Josey K, Plomondon ME, et al. Temporal trends, complica-
tions, and predictors of outcomes among nonagenarians undergoing 
percutaneous coronary intervention: insights from the Veterans Affairs 
clinical assessment, reporting, and tracking program. JACC Cardiovasc 
Interv. 2017;10:1295–1303.
 11. Harada M, Miura T, Kobayashi T, et al. Clinical impact of complete revascu-
larization in elderly patients with multi-vessel coronary artery disease under-
going percutaneous coronary intervention: a sub-analysis of the SHINANO 
registry. Int J Cardiol. 2017;230:413–419.
 12. Shan L, Saxena A, McMahon R. A systematic review on the quality of life 
benefits after percutaneous coronary intervention in the elderly. Cardiology 
(Switzerland). 2014;129:46–54.
 13. Reents W, Hilker M, Borgermann J, et al. Acute kidney injury after on-pump 
or off-pump coronary artery bypass grafting in elderly patients. Ann Thorac 
Surg. 2014;98:9–14; discussion 14-15.
 14. Diegeler A, Borgermann J, Kappert U, et al. Off-pump versus on-
pump coronary-artery bypass grafting in elderly patients. N Engl J Med. 
2013;368:1189–1198.
 15. Ono M, Serruys PW, Hara H, et al. 10-year follow-up after revascularization 
in elderly patients with complex coronary artery disease. J Am Coll Cardiol. 
2021;77:2761–2773.
 16. Khan MR, Kayani WT, Ahmad W, et al. Effect of increasing age on percu-
taneous coronary intervention vs coronary artery bypass grafting in older 
adults with unprotected left main coronary artery disease: a meta-analysis 
and meta-regression. Clin Cardiol. 2019;42:1071–1078.
 17 . Cui C, Sheng Z. Outcomes of percutaneous coronary intervention for chron-
ic total occlusions in the elderly: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Clin 
Cardiol. 2021;44:27–35.
 18. Xia TL, Huang FY, Li YM, et al. The impact of age on the implementation of 
evidence-based medications in patients with coronary artery disease and 
its prognostic significance: a retrospective cohort study. BMC Public Health. 
2018;18:150.
 19. Fukase T, Dohi T, Koike T, et al. Long-term impact of beta-blocker in elderly 
patients without myocardial infarction after percutaneous coronary interven-
tion. ESC Heart Fail. 2022;9:545–554.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on November 12, 2025

CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINESAugust 29, 2023 Circulation. 2023;148:e9–e119. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000001168
Virani et al 2023 AHA/ACC/ACCP/ASPC/NLA/PCNA Chronic Coronary Disease Guideline e110 20. Varenne O, Cook S, Sideris G, et al. Drug-eluting stents in elderly patients 
with coronary artery disease (SENIOR): a randomised single-blind trial. Lan-
cet. 2018;391:41–50.
 21. Lee SY, Hong MK, Palmerini T, et al. Short-term versus long-term dual an-
tiplatelet therapy after drug-eluting stent implantation in elderly patients: a 
meta-analysis of individual participant data from 6 randomized trials. J Am 
Coll Cardiol Intv. 2018;11:435–443.
 22. Ten Berg JM, Steg PG, Bhatt DL, et al. Comparison of the ef-
fect of age (< 75 versus >/= 75) on the efficacy and safety of dual 
therapy (dabigatran+clopidogrel or ticagrelor) versus triple therapy 
(warfarin+aspirin+clopidogrel or ticagrelor) in patients with atrial fibrillation 
after percutaneous coronary intervention (from the RE-DUAL PCI Trial). Am 
J Cardiol. 2020;125:735–743.
 23. Erlinge D, Gurbel PA, James S, et al. Prasugrel 5 mg in the very elderly at-
tenuates platelet inhibition but maintains noninferiority to prasugrel 10 mg 
in nonelderly patients: the GENERATIONS trial, a pharmacodynamic and 
pharmacokinetic study in stable coronary artery disease patients. J Am Coll 
Cardiol. 2013;62:577–583.
 24. Tammam K, Ikari Y, Yoshimachi F, et al. Impact of transradial coronary inter-
vention on bleeding complications in octogenarians. Cardiovasc Interv Ther. 
2017;32:18–23.
 25. Rubino AS, Gatti G, Reichart D, et al. Early outcome of bilateral versus 
single internal mammary artery grafting in the elderly. Ann Thorac Surg. 
2018;105:1717–1723.
 26. Medalion B, Mohr R, Ben-Gal Y, et al. Arterial coronary artery bypass 
grafting is safe and effective in elderly patients. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 
2015;150:607–612.
 27 . Hoffmann G, Friedrich C, Barrabas M, et al. Short- and long-term follow-
up after minimally invasive direct coronary artery bypass in octogenarians. 
Interact Cardiovasc Thorac Surg. 2016;23:377–382.
 28. Bortolussi G, Bejko J, Gallo M, et al. Coronary artery bypass grafting in 
elderly patients: insights from a comparative analysis of total arterial and 
conventional revascularization. J Cardiovasc Transl Res. 2016;9:223–229.
 29. Barsoum EA, Azab B, Patel N, et al. Long-term outcome after percutane-
ous coronary intervention compared with minimally invasive coronary artery 
bypass surgery in the elderly. Open Cardiovasc Med J. 2016;10:11–18.
 30. Scherrenberg M, Zeymer U, Schneider S, et al. EU-CaRE study: could exer-
cise-based cardiac telerehabilitation also be cost-effective in elderly?. Int J 
Cardiol. 2021;340:1–6.
 31. Snoek JA, Prescott EI, van der Velde AE, et al. Effectiveness of home-based 
mobile guided cardiac rehabilitation as alternative strategy for nonparticipa-
tion in clinic-based cardiac rehabilitation among elderly patients in Europe: 
a randomized clinical trial. JAMA Cardiol. 2021;6:463–468.
 32. Luc JGY, Graham MM, Norris CM, et al. Predicting operative mortality in 
octogenarians for isolated coronary artery bypass grafting surgery: a retro-
spective study. BMC Cardiovasc Disord. 2017;17:275.
 33. Eickhoff M, Schupke S, Khandoga A, et al. Age-dependent impact of the 
SYNTAX-score on longer-term mortality after percutaneous coronary inter-
vention in an all-comer population. J Geriatr Cardiol. 2018;15:559–566.
 34. He YY, Chang J, Wang XJ. Frailty as a predictor of all-cause mortality in el-
derly patients undergoing percutaneous coronary intervention: a systematic 
review and meta-analysis. Arch Gerontol Geriatr. 2022;98:104544.
 35. Xue Q, Wu J, Ren Y, et al. Sarcopenia predicts adverse outcomes in an 
elderly population with coronary artery disease: a systematic review and 
meta-analysis. BMC Geriatr. 2021;21:493.
 36. Tran DTT, Tu JV, Dupuis JY, et al. Association of frailty and long-term survival 
in patients undergoing coronary artery bypass grafting. J Am Heart Assoc. 
2018;7:e009882.
 37 . Qayyum S, Rossington JA, Chelliah R, et al. Prospective cohort study of 
elderly patients with coronary artery disease: impact of frailty on quality of 
life and outcome. Open Heart. 2020;7:e001314.
 38. Chen L, Huang Z, Lu J, et al. Impact of the malnutrition on mortality in elderly 
patients undergoing percutaneous coronary intervention. Clin Interv Aging. 
2021;16:1347–1356.
 39. Efe SC, Karagoz A, Dogan C, et al. Prognostic significance of malnutrition 
scores in elderly patients for the prediction of contrast-induced acute kid-
ney injury. Int J Clin Pract. 2021;75:e14274.
 40. Maruyama S, Ebisawa S, Miura T, et al. Impact of nutritional index on long-
term outcomes of elderly patients with coronary artery disease: sub-analysis 
of the SHINANO 5 year registry. Heart Vessels. 2021;36:7–13.
 41. Goel K, Gulati R, Reeder GS, et al. Low body mass index, serum creatinine, 
and cause of death in patients undergoing percutaneous coronary interven-
tion. J Am Heart Assoc. 2016;5:e003633.
 42. Molnar F, Frank CC. Optimizing geriatric care with the GERIATRIC 5Ms. Can 
Fam Physician. 2019;65:39.6.7 . Chronic Kidney Disease
 1. Mehran R, Aymong ED, Nikolsky E, et al. A simple risk score for prediction 
of contrast-induced nephropathy after percutaneous coronary intervention: 
development and initial validation. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2004;44:1393–1399.
 2. Moscucci M, Rogers EK, Montoye C, et al. Association of a continuous qual-
ity improvement initiative with practice and outcome variations of contempo-
rary percutaneous coronary interventions. Circulation. 2006;113:814–822.
 3. Mehran R, Dangas GD, Weisbord SD. Contrast-associated acute kidney in-
jury. N Engl J Med. 2019;380:2146–2155.
 4. Lawton JS, Tamis-Holland JE, Bangalore S, et al. 2021 ACC/AHA/SCAI 
guideline for coronary artery revascularization: a report of the American Col-
lege of Cardiology/American Heart Association Joint Committee on Clinical 
Practice Guidelines. Circulation. 2022;145:e18–e114.
 5. Anavekar NS, McMurray JJ, Velazquez EJ, et al. Relation between renal 
dysfunction and cardiovascular outcomes after myocardial infarction. N Engl 
J Med. 2004;351:1285–1295.
 6. Brosius FC 3rd, Hostetter TH, Kelepouris E, et al. Detection of chronic kid-
ney disease in patients with or at increased risk of cardiovascular disease: a 
science advisory from the American Heart Association Kidney and Cardio-
vascular Disease Council; the Councils on High Blood Pressure Research, 
Cardiovascular Disease in the Young, and Epidemiology and Prevention; 
and the Quality of Care and Outcomes Research Interdisciplinary Work-
ing Group. Developed in collaboration with the National Kidney Foundation. 
Circulation. 2006;114:1083–1087 .
 7 . Matzkies FK, Reinecke H, Regetmeier A, et al. Long-term outcome after 
percutaneous transluminal coronary angioplasty in patients with chronic re-
nal failure with and without diabetic nephropathy. Nephron. 2001;89:10–14.
 8. Sedlis SP, Jurkovitz CT, Hartigan PM, et al. Optimal medical therapy with or 
without percutaneous coronary intervention for patients with stable coronary 
artery disease and chronic kidney disease. Am J Cardiol. 2009;104:1647–
1653.
 9. Sarnak MJ, Levey AS, Schoolwerth AC, et al. Kidney disease as a risk factor 
for development of cardiovascular disease: a statement from the Ameri-
can Heart Association Councils on Kidney in Cardiovascular Disease, High 
Blood Pressure Research, Clinical Cardiology, and Epidemiology and Pre-
vention. Circulation. 2003;108:2154–2169.
 10. Stevens PE, O'Donoghue DJ, de Lusignan S, et al. Chronic kidney disease 
management in the United Kingdom: NEOERICA project results. Kidney Int. 
2007;72:92–99.
 11. Thompson S, James M, Wiebe N, et al. Cause of death in patients with 
reduced kidney function. J Am Soc Nephrol. 2015;26:2504–2511.
 12. Webster AC, Nagler EV, Morton RL, et al. Chronic kidney disease. Lancet. 
2017;389:1238–1252.
 13. Schwarz U, Buzello M, Ritz E, et al. Morphology of coronary atherosclerotic 
lesions in patients with end-stage renal failure. Nephrol Dial Transplant. 
2000;15:218–223.
 14. Nakamura S, Ishibashi-Ueda H, Niizuma S, et al. Coronary calcification in 
patients with chronic kidney disease and coronary artery disease. Clin J Am 
Soc Nephrol. 2009;4:1892–1900.
 15. Campean V, Neureiter D, Varga I, et al. Atherosclerosis and vascular calcifi-
cation in chronic renal failure. Kidney Blood Press Res. 2005;28:280–289.
 16. Konstantinidis I, Nadkarni GN, Yacoub R, et al. Representation of patients 
with kidney disease in trials of cardiovascular interventions: an updated sys-
tematic review. JAMA Intern Med. 2016;176:121–124.
 17 . Sarnak MJ, Amann K, Bangalore S, et al. Chronic kidney disease and 
coronary artery disease: JACC state-of-the-art review. J Am Coll Cardiol. 
2019;74:1823–1838.
 18. Bangalore S, Maron DJ, Fleg JL, et al. International study of compara-
tive health effectiveness with medical and invasive approaches-chronic 
kidney disease (ISCHEMIA-CKD): rationale and design. Am Heart J. 
2018;205:42–52.
 19. Collins AJ, Foley RN, Gilbertson DT, et al. United States Renal Data System 
public health surveillance of chronic kidney disease and end-stage renal 
disease. Kidney Int Suppl (2011). 2015;5:2–7 .
 20. Palmer SC, Craig JC, Navaneethan SD, et al. Benefits and harms of statin 
therapy for persons with chronic kidney disease: a systematic review and 
meta-analysis. Ann Intern Med. 2012;157:263–275.
 21. Palmer SC, Di Micco L, Razavian M, et al. Effects of antiplatelet therapy on 
mortality and cardiovascular and bleeding outcomes in persons with chronic 
kidney disease: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Ann Intern Med. 
2012;156:445–459.
 22. Dasari TW, Cohen DJ, Kleiman NS, et al. Statin therapy in patients with 
chronic kidney disease undergoing percutaneous coronary intervention 
(from the Evaluation of Drug Eluting Stents and Ischemic Events Registry). 
Am J Cardiol. 2014;113:621–625.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on November 12, 2025

CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINESCirculation. 2023;148:e9–e119. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000001168 August 29, 2023
Virani et al 2023 AHA/ACC/ACCP/ASPC/NLA/PCNA Chronic Coronary Disease Guideline e111 23. Charytan DM, Desai M, Mathur M, et al. Reduced risk of myocardial infarct 
and revascularization following coronary artery bypass grafting compared 
with percutaneous coronary intervention in patients with chronic kidney dis-
ease. Kidney Int. 2016;90:411–421.
 24. Bangalore S, Guo Y, Samadashvili Z, et al. Revascularization in patients with 
multivessel coronary artery disease and chronic kidney disease: everolimus-
eluting stents versus coronary artery bypass graft surgery. J Am Coll Cardiol. 
2015;66:1209–1220.
 25. Bangalore S, Maron DJ, O'Brien SM, et al. Management of coronary disease 
in patients with advanced kidney disease. N Engl J Med. 2020;382:1608–
1618.
 26. Reddan DN, Szczech LA, Tuttle RH, et al. Chronic kidney disease, mortality, 
and treatment strategies among patients with clinically significant coronary 
artery disease. J Am Soc Nephrol. 2003;14:2373–2380.
 27 . Marenzi G, Assanelli E, Campodonico J, et al. Contrast volume during pri-
mary percutaneous coronary intervention and subsequent contrast-induced 
nephropathy and mortality. Ann Intern Med. 2009;150:170–177 .
 28. Merten GJ, Burgess WP, Gray L V, et al. Prevention of contrast-induced ne-
phropathy with sodium bicarbonate: a randomized controlled trial. JAMA. 
2004;291:2328–2334.
 29. Mueller C, Buerkle G, Buettner HJ, et al. Prevention of contrast media-
associated nephropathy: randomized comparison of 2 hydration regi-
mens in 1620 patients undergoing coronary angioplasty. Arch Intern Med. 
2002;162:329–336.
 30. Laskey WK, Jenkins C, Selzer F, et al. Volume-to-creatinine clearance ra-
tio: a pharmacokinetically based risk factor for prediction of early creati-
nine increase after percutaneous coronary intervention. J Am Coll Cardiol. 
2007;50:584–590.
 31. Giacoppo D, Gargiulo G, Buccheri S, et al. Preventive strategies for contrast-
induced acute kidney injury in patients undergoing percutaneous coronary 
procedures: evidence from a hierarchical bayesian network meta-analysis of 
124 trials and 28 240 patients. Circ Cardiovasc Interv. 2017;10:e004383.
 32. Li Y, Liu Y, Fu L, et al. Efficacy of short-term high-dose statin in preventing 
contrast-induced nephropathy: a meta-analysis of seven randomized con-
trolled trials. PLoS One. 2012;7:e34450.
 33. Kooiman J, Seth M, Dixon S, et al. Risk of acute kidney injury after percuta-
neous coronary interventions using radial versus femoral vascular access: 
insights from the Blue Cross Blue Shield of Michigan Cardiovascular Con-
sortium. Circ Cardiovasc Interv. 2014;7:190–198.
 34. Ando G, Cortese B, Russo F, et al. Acute kidney injury after radial or femoral 
access for invasive acute coronary syndrome management: AKI-MATRIX. J 
Am Coll Cardiol. 2017;69:2592–2603.
 35. Cortese B, Sciahbasi A, Sebik R, et al. Comparison of risk of acute kidney 
injury after primary percutaneous coronary interventions with the transradial 
approach versus the transfemoral approach (from the PRIPITENA urban 
registry). Am J Cardiol. 2014;114:820–825.
 36. Marbach JA, Wells G, Santo PD, et al. Acute kidney injury after radial or 
femoral artery access in ST-segment elevation myocardial infarction: AKI-
SAFARI. Am Heart J. 2021;234:12–22.
 37 . Stephan T, Felbel D, Rattka M, et al. Impact of radial access on contrast-
induced acute kidney injury in patients with coronary artery bypass grafts. 
Cardiovasc Revasc Med. 2022;36:123–131.
 38. Mehta RH, Honeycutt E, Patel UD, et al. Relationship of the time in-
terval between cardiac catheterization and elective coronary artery 
bypass surgery with postprocedural acute kidney injury. Circulation. 
2011;124:S149–S155.
 39. Investigators ACT. Acetylcysteine for prevention of renal outcomes in pa-
tients undergoing coronary and peripheral vascular angiography: main re-
sults from the randomized Acetylcysteine for Contrast-induced nephropathy 
Trial (ACT). Circulation. 2011;124:1250–1259.
6.8. HIV and Autoimmune Disorders
 1. El-Sadr WM, Lundgren J, et al.; SMART Study Group. CD4+ count-guided 
interruption of antiretroviral treatment. N Engl J Med. 2006;355:2283–
2296.
 2. Garg H, Joshi A, Mukherjee D. Cardiovascular complications of HIV infec-
tion and treatment. Cardiovasc Hematol Agents Med Chem. 2013;11:58–66.
 3. Gatell JM, Assoumou L, Moyle G, et al. Switching from a ritonavir-boost-
ed protease inhibitor to a dolutegravir-based regimen for maintenance 
of HIV viral suppression in patients with high cardiovascular risk. AIDS. 
2017;31:2503–2514.
 4. Dorjee K, Choden T, Baxi SM, et al. Risk of cardiovascular disease associ-
ated with exposure to abacavir among individuals with HIV: a systematic 
review and meta-analyses of results from 17 epidemiologic studies. Int J 
Antimicrob Agents. 2018;52:541–553. 5. Cruciani M, Zanichelli V, Serpelloni G, et al. Abacavir use and cardiovascular 
disease events: a meta-analysis of published and unpublished data. AIDS. 
2011;25:1993–2004.
 6. Hsue PY, Waters DD. HIV infection and coronary heart disease: mecha-
nisms and management. Nat Rev Cardiol. 2019;16:745–759.
 7 . Feinstein MJ, Hsue PY, Benjamin LA, et al. Characteristics, prevention, 
and management of cardiovascular disease in people living with HIV: a 
scientific statement from the American Heart Association. Circulation. 
2019;140:e98–e124.
 8. De Vecchis R, Baldi C, Palmisani L. Protective effects of methotrexate 
against ischemic cardiovascular disorders in patients treated for rheumatoid 
arthritis or psoriasis: novel therapeutic insights coming from a meta-analysis 
of the literature data. Anatol J Cardiol. 2016;16:2–9.
 9. Sattin M, Towheed T. The effect of TNFα-inhibitors on cardiovascular events 
in patients with rheumatoid arthritis: an updated systematic review of the 
literature. Curr Rheumatol Rev. 2016;12:208–222.
 10. Agca R, Heslinga SC, Rollefstad S, et al. EULAR recommendations for car-
diovascular disease risk management in patients with rheumatoid arthritis 
and other forms of inflammatory joint disorders: 2015/2016 update. Ann 
Rheum Dis. 2017;76:17–28.
 11. Roubille C, Richer V, Starnino T, et al. The effects of tumour necrosis factor 
inhibitors, methotrexate, non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs and corti-
costeroids on cardiovascular events in rheumatoid arthritis, psoriasis and 
psoriatic arthritis: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Ann Rheum Dis. 
2015;74:480–489.
 12. Ocon AJ, Reed G, Pappas DA, et al. Short-term dose and duration-depen-
dent glucocorticoid risk for cardiovascular events in glucocorticoid-naive 
patients with rheumatoid arthritis. Ann Rheum Dis. 2021;80:1522–1529.
 13. Grundy SM, Stone NJ, Bailey AL, et al. 2018 AHA/ACC/AACVPR/AAPA/
ABC/ACPM/ADA/AGS/APhA/ASPC/NLA/PCNA guideline on the man-
agement of blood cholesterol: a report of the American College of Cardiol-
ogy/American Heart Association Task Force on Clinical Practice Guidelines. 
Circulation. 2019;139:e1082–e1143.
 14. Virani SS, Alonso A, Aparicio HJ, et al. Heart disease and stroke statis-
tics-2021 update: a report from the American Heart Association. Circulation. 
2021;143:e254–e743.
 15. Bavinger C, Bendavid E, Niehaus K, et al. Risk of cardiovascular dis-
ease from antiretroviral therapy for HIV: a systematic review. PLoS One. 
2013;8:e59551.
 16. Helleberg M, Kronborg G, Larsen CS, et al. CD4 decline is associated with 
increased risk of cardiovascular disease, cancer, and death in virally sup-
pressed patients with HIV. Clin Infect Dis. 2013;57:314–321.
 17 . Lang S, Mary-Krause M, Simon A, et al. HIV replication and immune status 
are independent predictors of the risk of myocardial infarction in HIV-infect-
ed individuals. Clin Infect Dis. 2012;55:600–607 .
 18. Saag MS, Gandhi RT, Hoy JF, et al. Antiretroviral drugs for treatment and 
prevention of HIV infection in adults: 2020 recommendations of the Inter-
national Antiviral Society-USA Panel. JAMA. 2020;324:1651–1669.
 19. Nhean S, Tseng A, Back D. The intersection of drug interactions and ad-
verse reactions in contemporary antiretroviral therapy. Curr Opin HIV AIDS. 
2021;16:292–302.
 20. Singh S, Willig JH, Mugavero MJ, et al. Comparative effectiveness and tox-
icity of statins among HIV-infected patients. Clin Infect Dis. 2011;52:387–
395.
 21. Aslangul E, Assoumou L, Bittar R, et al. Rosuvastatin versus pravastatin in 
dyslipidemic HIV-1-infected patients receiving protease inhibitors: a ran-
domized trial. AIDS. 2010;24:77–83.
 22. Virani SS, Morris PB, Agarwala A, et al. 2021 ACC expert consensus deci-
sion pathway on the management of ASCVD risk reduction in patients with 
persistent hypertriglyceridemia: a report of the American College of Cardi-
ology Solution Set Oversight Committee. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2021;78:960–
993.
 23. Marsousi N, Samer CF, Fontana P, et al. Coadministration of ticagrelor and 
ritonavir: Toward prospective dose adjustment to maintain an optimal platelet 
inhibition using the PBPK approach. Clin Pharmacol Ther. 2016;100:295–
304.
 24. Dube MP, Stein JH, Aberg JA, et al. Guidelines for the evaluation and man-
agement of dyslipidemia in human immunodeficiency virus (HIV)-infected 
adults receiving antiretroviral therapy: recommendations of the HIV Medi-
cal Association of the Infectious Disease Society of America and the Adult 
AIDS Clinical Trials Group. Clin Infect Dis. 2003;37:613–627 .
 25. Karpouzas GA, Ormseth SR, Hernandez E, et al. Biologics may pre-
vent cardiovascular events in rheumatoid arthritis by inhibiting coronary 
plaque formation and stabilizing high-risk lesions. Arthritis Rheumatol. 
2020;72:1467–1475.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on November 12, 2025

CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINESAugust 29, 2023 Circulation. 2023;148:e9–e119. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000001168
Virani et al 2023 AHA/ACC/ACCP/ASPC/NLA/PCNA Chronic Coronary Disease Guideline e112 26. Gladman DD, Charles-Schoeman C, McInnes IB, et al. Changes in lipid lev-
els and incidence of cardiovascular events following tofacitinib treatment in 
patients with psoriatic arthritis: a pooled analysis across phase III and long-
term extension studies. Arthritis Care Res (Hoboken). 2019;71:1387–1395.
 27 . Karmacharya P, Shahukhal R, Crowson CS, et al. Effects of therapies on 
cardiovascular events in ankylosing spondylitis: a systematic review and 
meta-analysis. Rheumatol Ther. 2020;7:993–1009.
6.9. Cardiac Allograft Vasculopathy in Heart Transplant 
Recipients
 1. Asleh R, Briasoulis A, Pereira NL, et al. Timing of 3-hydroxy-3-methylglu-
taryl-coenzyme A reductase inhibitor initiation and allograft vasculopathy 
progression and outcomes in heart transplant recipients. ESC Heart Fail. 
2018;5:1118–1129.
 2. Asleh R, Briasoulis A, Smith B, et al. Association of aspirin treatment with 
cardiac allograft vasculopathy progression and adverse outcomes after 
heart transplantation. J Card Fail. 2021;27:542–551.
 3. Costanzo MR, Dipchand A, Starling R, et al. The International Society of 
Heart and Lung Transplantation Guidelines for the care of heart transplant 
recipients. J Heart Lung Transplant. 2010;29:914–956.
 4. Pyka L, Hawranek M, Szygula-Jurkiewicz B, et al. Everolimus-eluting sec-
ond-generation stents for treatment of de novo lesions in patients with car-
diac allograft vasculopathy. Ann Transplant. 2020;25:e921266.
 5. Cheng R, Vanichsarn C, Patel JK, et al. Long-term clinical and angiographic 
outcomes of percutanenous coronary intervention with everolimus-eluting 
stents for the treatment of cardiac allograft vasculopathy. Catheter Cardio-
vasc Interv. 2017;90:48–55.
 6. Azarbal B, Arbit B, Ramaraj R, et al. Clinical and angiographic outcomes with 
everolimus eluting stents for the treatment of cardiac allograft vasculopathy. 
J Interv Cardiol. 2014;27:73–79.
 7 . Lawton JS, Tamis-Holland JE, Bangalore S, et al. 2021 ACC/AHA/SCAI 
guideline for coronary artery revascularization: a report of the American Col-
lege of Cardiology/American Heart Association Joint Committee on Clinical 
Practice Guidelines. Circulation. 2022;145:e18–e114.
 8. Khush KK, Potena L, Cherikh WS, et al. The International Thoracic Organ 
Transplant Registry of the International Society for Heart and Lung Trans-
plantation: 37th adult heart transplantation report-2020; focus on deceased 
donor characteristics. J Heart Lung Transplant. 2020;39:1003–1015.
 9. Mehra MR, Crespo-Leiro MG, Dipchand A, et al. International Society for 
Heart and Lung Transplantation working formulation of a standardized no-
menclature for cardiac allograft vasculopathy-2010. J Heart Lung Trans-
plant. 2010;29:717–727 .
 10. Kobashigawa JA, Tobis JM, Starling RC, et al. Multicenter intravascular ul-
trasound validation study among heart transplant recipients: outcomes after 
five years. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2005;45:1532–1537 .
 11. Doumouras BS, Fan CS, Mueller B, et al. The effect of pre-heart transplant 
body mass index on posttransplant outcomes: an analysis of the ISHL T reg-
istry data. Clin Transplant. 2019;33:e13621.
 12. Nytroen K, Rustad LA, Erikstad I, et al. Effect of high-intensity interval train-
ing on progression of cardiac allograft vasculopathy. J Heart Lung Trans-
plant. 2013;32:1073–1080.
 13. Mancini D, Pinney S, Burkhoff D, et al. Use of rapamycin slows progression 
of cardiac transplantation vasculopathy. Circulation. 2003;108:48–53.
 14. Topilsky Y, Hasin T, Raichlin E, et al. Sirolimus as primary immunosup-
pression attenuates allograft vasculopathy with improved late survival 
and decreased cardiac events after cardiac transplantation. Circulation. 
2012;125:708–720.
 15. Raichlin E, Bae JH, Khalpey Z, et al. Conversion to sirolimus as primary im-
munosuppression attenuates the progression of allograft vasculopathy after 
cardiac transplantation. Circulation. 2007;116:2726–2733.
 16. Arora S, Andreassen AK, Andersson B, et al. The effect of everolimus initia-
tion and calcineurin inhibitor elimination on cardiac allograft vasculopathy in 
de novo recipients: one-year results of a Scandinavian randomized trial. Am 
J Transplant. 2015;15:1967–1975.
 17 . Arora S, Andreassen AK, Karason K, et al. Effect of everolimus initiation and 
calcineurin inhibitor elimination on cardiac allograft vasculopathy in de novo 
heart transplant recipients. Circ Heart Fail. 2018;11:e004050.
 18. Wenke K, Meiser B, Thiery J, et al. Impact of simvastatin therapy after heart 
transplantation an 11-year prospective evaluation. Herz. 2005;30:431–
432.
 19. Kobashigawa JA, Moriguchi JD, Laks H, et al. Ten-year follow-up of a ran-
domized trial of pravastatin in heart transplant patients. J Heart Lung Trans-
plant. 2005;24:1736–1740.
 20. Wiggins BS, Saseen JJ, Page RL 2nd, et al. Recommendations for manage-
ment of clinically significant drug-drug interactions with statins and select agents used in patients with cardiovascular disease: a scientific statement 
from the American Heart Association. Circulation. 2016;134:e468–e495.
 21. Golbus JR, Adie S, Yosef M, et al. Statin intensity and risk for cardiovascular 
events after heart transplantation. ESC Heart Fail. 2020;7:2074–2081.
 22. Bergmark BA, Zelniker TA, Kim M, et al. Early aspirin use, allograft rejection, 
and cardiac allograft vasculopathy in heart transplantation. Clin Transplant. 
2021;35:e14424.
 23. Kim M, Bergmark BA, Zelniker TA, et al. Early aspirin use and the de-
velopment of cardiac allograft vasculopathy. J Heart Lung Transplant. 
2017;36:1344–1349.
 24. Peled Y, Lavee J, Raichlin E, et al. Early aspirin initiation following heart 
transplantation is associated with reduced risk of allograft vasculopathy dur-
ing long-term follow-up. Clin Transplant. 2017;31: doi: 10.1111/ctr.13133
 25. Kereiakes DJ, Sudhir K, Hermiller JB, et al. Comparison of everolimus-elut-
ing and paclitaxel-eluting coronary stents in patients undergoing multilesion 
and multivessel intervention: the SPIRIT III (A Clinical Evaluation of the In-
vestigational Device XIENCE V Everolimus Eluting Coronary Stent System 
[EECSS] in the Treatment of Subjects With De Novo Native Coronary Artery 
Lesions) and SPIRIT IV (Clinical Evaluation of the XIENCE V Everolimus 
Eluting Coronary Stent System in the Treatment of Subjects With De Novo 
Native Coronary Artery Lesions) randomized trials. J Am Coll Cardiol Intv. 
2010;3:1229–1239.
 26. Dangas GD, Serruys PW, Kereiakes DJ, et al. Meta-analysis of everolim-
us-eluting versus paclitaxel-eluting stents in coronary artery disease: final 
3-year results of the SPIRIT clinical trials program (Clinical Evaluation of 
the Xience V Everolimus Eluting Coronary Stent System in the Treatment of 
Patients With De Novo Native Coronary Artery Lesions). J Am Coll Cardiol 
Intv. 2013;6:914–922.
 27 . Yang HM, Khush K, Luikart H, et al. Invasive assessment of coronary 
physiology predicts late mortality after heart transplantation. Circulation. 
2016;133:1945–1950.
 28. Ahn JM, Zimmermann FM, Arora S, et al. Prognostic value of comprehensive 
intracoronary physiology assessment early after heart transplantation. Eur 
Heart J. 2021;42:4918–4929.
 29. Luc JGY, Choi JH, Rizvi SA, et al. Percutaneous coronary intervention versus 
coronary artery bypass grafting in heart transplant recipients with coronary 
allograft vasculopathy: a systematic review and meta-analysis of 1520 pa-
tients. Ann Cardiothorac Surg. 2018;7:19–30.
 30. Wiggins BS, Saseen JJ, Page RL 2nd, et al. Recommendations for manage-
ment of clinically significant drug-drug interactions with statins and select 
agents used in patients with cardiovascular disease: a scientific statement 
from the American Heart Association. Circulation. 2016;134:e468–e495.
7 .1. Follow-Up Plan and Testing in Stable Patients
 1. Leemrijse CJ, Peters RJ, von Birgelen C, et al. The telephone lifestyle in-
tervention 'Hartcoach' has modest impact on coronary risk factors: a ran-
domised multicentre trial. Eur J Prev Cardiol. 2016;23:1658–1668.
 2. Hawkes AL, Patrao TA, Atherton J, et al. Effect of a telephone-delivered 
coronary heart disease secondary prevention program (proactive heart) on 
quality of life and health behaviours: primary outcomes of a randomised 
controlled trial. Int J Behav Med. 2013;20:413–424.
 3. O'Neil A, Hawkes AL, Atherton JJ, et al. Telephone-delivered health coach-
ing improves anxiety outcomes after myocardial infarction: the 'ProActive 
Heart' trial. Eur J Prev Cardiol. 2014;21:30–38.
 4. O'Neil A, Taylor B, Sanderson K, et al. Efficacy and feasibility of a tele-
health intervention for acute coronary syndrome patients with depression: 
results of the “MoodCare” randomized controlled trial. Ann Behav Med. 
2014;48:163–174.
 5. O'Neil A, Taylor B, Hare DL, et al. Long-term efficacy of a tele-health inter-
vention for acute coronary syndrome patients with depression: 12-month 
results of the MoodCare randomized controlled trial. Eur J Prev Cardiol. 
2015;22:1111–1120.
 6. Minneboo M, Lachman S, Snaterse M, et al. Community-based lifestyle in-
tervention in patients with coronary artery disease: the RESPONSE-2 trial. 
J Am Coll Cardiol. 2017;70:318–327 .
 7 . Santo K, Hyun K, de Keizer L, et al. The effects of a lifestyle-focused text-
messaging intervention on adherence to dietary guideline recommenda-
tions in patients with coronary heart disease: an analysis of the TEXT ME 
study. Int J Behav Nutr Phys Act. 2018;15:45.
 8. Maron DJ, Hochman JS, Reynolds HR, et al. Initial invasive or conservative 
strategy for stable coronary disease. N Engl J Med. 2020;382:1395–1407 .
 9. Steg PG, Greenlaw N, Tendera M, et al. Prevalence of anginal symptoms and 
myocardial ischemia and their effect on clinical outcomes in outpatients with 
stable coronary artery disease: data from the International Observational 
CLARIFY Registry. JAMA Intern Med. 2014;174:1651–1659.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on November 12, 2025

CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINESCirculation. 2023;148:e9–e119. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000001168 August 29, 2023
Virani et al 2023 AHA/ACC/ACCP/ASPC/NLA/PCNA Chronic Coronary Disease Guideline e113 10. Park DW, Kang DY, Ahn JM, et al. Routine functional testing or standard 
care in high-risk patients after PCI. N Engl J Med. 2022;387:905–915.
 11. Beller GA. Tests that may be overused or misused in cardiology: the Choos-
ing Wisely campaign. J Nucl Cardiol. 2012;19:401–403.
 12. Garzillo CL, Hueb W, Gersh BJ, et al. Long-term analysis of left ventricular 
ejection fraction in patients with stable multivessel coronary disease under-
going medicine, angioplasty or surgery: 10-year follow-up of the MASS II 
trial. Eur Heart J. 2013;34:3370–3377 .
 13. Choi S, Mun HS, Kang MK, et al. Clinical impact of routine follow-up coro-
nary angiography after second- or third-generation drug-eluting stent inser-
tion in clinically stable patients. Korean J Intern Med. 2015;30:49–55.
 14. Shiomi H, Morimoto T, Kitaguchi S, et al. The ReACT Trial: Randomized 
Evaluation of Routine Follow-up Coronary Angiography After Percutane-
ous Coronary Intervention Trial. J Am Coll Cardiol Intv. 2017;10:109–
117 .
 15. Simonsen JA, Mickley H, Johansen A, et al. Outcome of revascularisation in 
stable coronary artery disease without ischaemia: a Danish registry-based 
follow-up study. BMJ Open. 2017;7:e016169.
 16. Uchida T, Popma J, Stone GW, et al. The clinical impact of routine an-
giographic follow-up in randomized trials of drug-eluting stents: a critical 
assessment of “oculostenotic” reintervention in patients with intermediate 
lesions. J Am Coll Cardiol Intv. 2010;3:403–411.
 17 . Agrawal H, Teleb M, Lahsaei S, et al. Routine angiographic follow-up after 
coronary artery disease revascularization: is seeing believing?. Curr Cardiol 
Rep. 2018;20:17 .
 18. Pocock S, Brieger DB, Owen R, et al. Health-related quality of life 1-3 
years post-myocardial infarction: its impact on prognosis. Open Heart. 
2021;8:e001499.
 19. Sorbets E, Fox KM, Elbez Y, et al. Long-term outcomes of chronic coronary 
syndrome worldwide: insights from the international CLARIFY registry. Eur 
Heart J. 2020;41:347–356.
 20. Mesnier J, Ducrocq G, Danchin N, et al. International observational analy-
sis of evolution and outcomes of chronic stable angina: the multinational 
CLARIFY study. Circulation. 2021;144:512–523.
 21. Garcia BH, Giverhaug T, Hoegli JU, et al. A pharmacist-led follow-
up program for patients with established coronary heart disease in 
North Norway: a randomized controlled trial. Pharm Pract (Granada). 
2015;13:575.
 22. Gyberg V, De Bacquer D, De Backer G, et al. Patients with coronary ar-
tery disease and diabetes need improved management: a report from the 
EUROASPIRE IV survey: a registry from the EuroObservational Research 
Programme of the European Society of Cardiology. Cardiovasc Diabetol. 
2015;14:133. 23. Kotseva K, De Bacquer D, Jennings C, et al. Time trends in lifestyle, risk 
factor control, and use of evidence-based medications in patients with coro-
nary heart disease in Europe: results from 3 EUROASPIRE surveys, 1999-
2013. Glob Heart. 2017;12:315–322.e3.
 24. Wijeysundera HC, Machado M, Farahati F, et al. Association of temporal 
trends in risk factors and treatment uptake with coronary heart disease mor-
tality, 1994-2005. JAMA. 2010;303:1841–1847 .
 25. Zheng X, Spatz ES, Bai X, et al. Effect of text messaging on risk factor 
management in patients with coronary heart disease: the CHAT randomized 
clinical trial. Circ Cardiovasc Qual Outcomes. 2019;12:e005616.
 26. Wan Y, Wu X, Kou Y. The impact of text message on self-management 
for coronary heart disease: a meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials. 
Heart Surg Forum. 2020;23:e018–e024.
 27 . Turkstra E, Hawkes AL, Oldenburg B, et al. Cost-effectiveness of a coronary 
heart disease secondary prevention program in patients with myocardial in-
farction: results from a randomised controlled trial (ProActive Heart). BMC 
Cardiovasc Disord. 2013;13:33.
 28. Spertus JA, Jones PG, Maron DJ, et al. Health-status outcomes with invasive 
or conservative care in coronary disease. N Engl J Med. 2020;382:1408–
1419.
 29. Kim YH, Her AY, Choi BG, et al. Routine angiographic follow-up versus clini-
cal follow-up in patients with diabetes following percutaneous coronary in-
tervention with drug-eluting stents in Korean population. Diabetes Res Clin 
Pract. 2018;138:138–148.
8.1. Cost and Value Considerations
 1. Kazi DS, Lu CY, Lin GA, et al. Nationwide coverage and cost-sharing 
for PCSK9 inhibitors among Medicare part D plans. JAMA Cardiol. 
2017;2:1164–1166.
 2. Navar AM, Taylor B, Mulder H, et al. Association of prior authorization and 
out-of-pocket costs with patient access to PCSK9 inhibitor therapy. JAMA 
Cardiol. 2017;2:1217–1225.
 3. Khera R, Valero-Elizondo J, Das SR, et al. Cost-related medication nonad-
herence in adults with atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease in the United 
States, 2013 to 2017 . Circulation. 2019;140:2067–2075.
 4. Alexander GC, Casalino LP, Meltzer DO. Patient-physician communication 
about out-of-pocket costs. JAMA. 2003;290:953–958.
 5. Rao BR, Dickert NW, Morris AA, et al. Heart failure and shared decision-
making: patients open to medication-related cost discussions. Circ Heart 
Fail. 2020;13:e007094.
 6. Smith GH, Shore S, Allen LA, et al. Discussing out-of-pocket costs with 
patients: shared decision making for sacubitril-valsartan in heart failure. J 
Am Heart Assoc. 2019;8:e010635.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on November 12, 2025

CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINESAugust 29, 2023 Circulation. 2023;148:e9–e119. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000001168
Virani et al 2023 AHA/ACC/ACCP/ASPC/NLA/PCNA Chronic Coronary Disease Guideline e114Appendix 1. Author Relationships With Industry and Other Entities—2023 AHA/ACC/ACCP/ASPC/NLA/PCNA Guideline for the 
Management of Patients With Chronic Coronary Disease
Committee 
Member Employment Consultant Speakers 
Bureau Ownership/ 
Partnership/ 
Principal Personal Research Institutional,  
Organizational, or Other  
Financial Benefit Expert Witness 
Salim S.  
Virani, 
Chair(Effective February 
2023)
Aga Khan Univer-
sity—Vice Provost, 
Research; Texas 
Heart Institute—Pro-
fessional Staff
(Until February 2023)
Baylor College of 
Medicine—Profes-
sor, Cardiovascular 
Fellowship Program 
Director; Michael E. 
DeBakey VA Medical 
Center for Cardio-
vascular Disease 
Prevention (Clinic)—
Staff Cardiologist/
Co-Director, VA 
Advanced Fellowship 
Program in Health 
Services Research & 
DevelopmentNone None None NOT RELEVANT
 • NIH/FIC (DSMB)
 • Tahir and Jooma  
Family*
 • US Department of VA*NOT RELEVANT
 • ACC*
 • ACC.org, Associate Editor for 
Innovations and Editorial lead, 
and Editorial lead for Preven-
tion topic collection
 • ASPC
 • Circulation, Guest Editor
 • Current Atherosclerosis 
Reports, Current Cardiology 
Reports, Section Editor
 • Journal of Clinical  
Lipidology, Associate Editor
 • NIH*
 • NAACME
 • NLA
 • Tabba Heart Institute,  
Steering Committee Member, 
PAK-SEHAT
 • WHF†None
L. Kristin
Newby, 
Vice ChairDuke University— 
Professor of Medi-
cine,
Division of Cardiolo-
gy and Duke Clinical 
Research InstituteRELEVANT
 • CSL Behring
 • Medtronic*
NOT RELEVANT
 • Beckman  
Coulter
 • NHLBI
 • NC DHHSNone None RELEVANT 
 • Boehringer-Ingelheim
NOT RELEVANT
 • David H. Murdock  
Institute for Business 
and Culture
 • NIH*
 • NIH (DSMB)†
 • North Carolina DHHS*
 • Roche Diagnostics*NOT RELEVANT
 • ACC†
 • AHA†
 • American Heart Journal,  
Editorial Board†
 • AstraZeneca Healthcare Foun-
dation†
 • David H. Murdock Research 
Institute†
 • European Heart Journal- 
Acute Cardiovascular Care, 
Editorial Board†
 • JACC Basic Transl Sci
 • WHF†None
Suzanne V. 
ArnoldSt. Luke’s Mid Amer-
ica Heart Institute
University of 
Missouri-Kansas 
City—Professor of 
MedicineNone None None None NOT RELEVANT
 • Heart, Associate EditorNone
Vera Bittner University of Alabama 
at Birmingham, 
Division of Cardiovas-
cular Disease—Pro-
fessor of Medicine; 
Endowed Scholar 
in Cardiovascular 
Disease Prevention; 
Section Head Gener-
al Cardiology, Preven-
tion, and ImagingRELEVANT 
 • Pfizer
NOT RELEVANT
 • ACC*None None RELEVANT 
 • Amgen
 • Novartis*
NOT RELEVANT
 • Verve Therapeutics 
(DSMB)RELEVANT
 • AstraZeneca*
 • Dalcor*
 • Esperion*
 • Sanofi-Aventis*
NOT RELEVANT
 • AHA*
 • ACC*
 • Medscape
 • NLANone
LaPrincess 
C. BrewerMayo Clinic—As-
sistant Professor of 
Medicine,
Preventive Cardi-
ologyNone None None NOT RELEVANT
 • AHA, AHA EPI,  
Presidential Advisory, 
SDOH†
 • NIH
 • CDCNOT RELEVANT
 • ABC†
 • ACC†
 • American Journal of  
Preventive Cardiology,  
Editorial Board
 • JAMA, Editorial Board
 • Current CV Risk Reports,  
Section EditorNone
Susan Halli 
DemeterMayo Clinic Ari-
zona—
Assistant Professor 
of Medicine
Heart Health & Per-
formance Program
Lipid ClinicNone NOT RELEVANT
 • Integrity
 • National  
Lipid  
Association/ 
Paradigm 
Medical 
Communica-
tionNone None NOT RELEVANT
 • Amgen‡
 • Ionis Pharmaceuticals/ 
Medpace‡
 • NLA
 • PCNA†None
(Continued )
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on November 12, 2025

CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINESCirculation. 2023;148:e9–e119. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000001168 August 29, 2023
Virani et al 2023 AHA/ACC/ACCP/ASPC/NLA/PCNA Chronic Coronary Disease Guideline e115Committee 
Member Employment Consultant Speakers 
Bureau Ownership/ 
Partnership/ 
Principal Personal Research Institutional,  
Organizational, or Other  
Financial Benefit Expert Witness 
Dave L. 
DixonVirginia Common-
wealth University 
School of Pharma-
cy—Associate Pro-
fessor and Depart-
ment Chair,
Department of 
Pharmacotherapy & 
Outcome ScienceNOT RELEVANT
 • APhANone None RELEVANT
 • Boehringer Ingelheim*
NOT RELEVANT
 • Board of Pharmacy  
Specialties
 • CDC*
 • NIH
 • Mercatus*NOT RELEVANT
 • ACC
 • ACCP, Cardiology Practice 
Research Network†
 • Accreditation Council for  
Clinical Lipidology†
 • AHA
 • Diabetes/Metabolism: 
Research and Reviews,  
Editorial Board
 • Journal of Cardiovascular 
Pharmacology
 • Journal of Clinical  
Lipidology, Associate Editor†
 • Medscape
 • NLA†
 • PCORINone
William F. 
FearonStanford University/
VA Palo Alto Health-
care System—Profes-
sor of MedicineRELEVANT
 • CathWorks
 • Siemens
NOT RELEVANT
 • ACC
 • Gentuity, LLC*None None RELEVANT
 • Abbott†
 • Boston Scientific†
 • Edwards Lifesciences†
 • Medtronic†
NOT RELEVANT
 • NIHNOT RELEVANT
 • Circulation, Editorial Board
 • Circulation: Cardiovascular 
Interventions, Editorial Board
 • HeartFlow
 • International Journal of  
Cardiology, Editorial Board
 • JACC , Editorial Board
 • McGraw Hill
 • Neovasc Medical Inc.
 • Stanford University, Abbott‡
 • Stanford University, 
Medtronic‡
 • ZollNone
Beverly 
HessMicrosoft—Senior 
Director (Retired)None None None None NOT RELEVANT
 • AHA Women of Impact, Nomi-
nee
 • AHA, Established  
Investigators Award Peer 
Review PanelNone
Heather M. 
JohnsonChristine E. Lynn 
Women’s Health & 
Wellness Institute,
Department of Pre-
ventive Cardiology
Boca Regional Hos-
pital; Baptist Health 
South Florida—
Clinical Affiliate; 
Florida Atlantic 
University—Associate 
Professor; University 
of Wisconsin-Madi-
son—Adjunct Associ-
ate ProfessorNOT RELEVANT
 • Best Doctors 
Advisory Panel
 • M3 Global 
ResearchNOT RELEVANT
 • ASPC
 • Medtel-
ligence†
 • Women-
HeartNone NOT RELEVANT
 • NIH*NOT RELEVANT
 • AHA
 • American Journal of  
Preventive Cardiology,  
Editorial Board†
 • Applied Radiology†
 • ASPC†
 • CureMetrix†
 • Esperion
 • NIHNone
Dhruv S. 
KaziHarvard Medical 
School—Associate 
Professor; Beth 
Israel Deaconess 
Medical Center— 
Director, Cardiac 
Critical Care;
Smith Center for 
Outcomes  
Research—  
Associate DirectorNone None None NOT RELEVANT
 • Harvard Medical  
School-Institutional 
Grant, Boston  
Scientific*NOT RELEVANT
 • AHA†
 • Bayer
 • Circulation: Cardiovascular 
Quality and Outcomes
 • Harvard Global Health  
Institute
 • Institute for Clinical  
Economic Review
 • Lahey Medical Center, 
Grand Rounds
 • NIH/NHLBI
 • Stanford University, Grand 
RoundsNone
Dhaval 
KolteMassachusetts 
General Hospital 
and Harvard Medical 
School—Instructor in 
Medicine
Department of 
Medicine, Cardiology 
DivisionNone None None None NOT RELEVANT
 • AHJ, Editorial Board
 • ACC†
 • AHA†
 • Biotronik
 • Medtronic
 • NIH
 • SCAI†NoneAppendix 1. Continued
(Continued )
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on November 12, 2025

CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINESAugust 29, 2023 Circulation. 2023;148:e9–e119. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000001168
Virani et al 2023 AHA/ACC/ACCP/ASPC/NLA/PCNA Chronic Coronary Disease Guideline e116Committee 
Member Employment Consultant Speakers 
Bureau Ownership/ 
Partnership/ 
Principal Personal Research Institutional,  
Organizational, or Other  
Financial Benefit Expert Witness 
Dharam J. 
KumbhaniUT Southwestern 
Medical Center—As-
sociate Professor of 
Medicine and Sec-
tion Chief, Interven-
tional Cardiology
William Clements 
University Hospital—
Cath Lab DirectorNOT RELEVANT
 • ACC*None None NOT RELEVANT
 • PCORINOT RELEVANT
 • Circulation, Associate  
Editor*None
Jim LoFaso Engineer (Retired) None None None None NOT RELEVANT
 • AHA†None
Dhruv 
MahttaBaylor College of 
Medicine—Cardiol-
ogy Fellow, Depart-
ment of Medicine, 
Division of Cardio-
vascular DiseaseNone None None None NOT RELEVANT
 • AHJ, Editor
 • AstraZeneca
 • JAHA, Editor
 • Chiesi
 • Current Cardiology, Section 
Editor
 • Current Atherosclerosis,  
Section EditorNone
Daniel B. 
MarkDuke University 
Medical Center—Pro-
fessor of Medicine; 
Vice Chief for Aca-
demic Affairs
Division of Cardiol-
ogy, Department of 
MedicineRELEVANT
 • NovartisNone None RELEVANT
 • Merck*RELEVANT
 • Merck*
NOT RELEVANT
 • AHJ, Editor
 • Elsevier*
 • Heartflow*
 • NIH*NOT RELEVANT
 • Defendant, 
Arrhythmia 
issues, 2020
 • Defendant, 
Acute SOP/
CP, 2020
 • Defendant, 
Respiratory 
Arrest, 2020
 • Workers’ 
Compensation 
Issues, 2020
Margo 
MinissianCedars-Sinai—Execu-
tive Director, Geri 
and Richard Brawer-
man Nursing Insti-
tute; Simms/ Mann 
Family Foundation 
Endowed Chair in 
Nurse Education, 
Innovation and Re-
search and Assistant 
Professor, Depart-
ment of CardiologyNOT RELEVANT
 • Medtelligence*
 • MJH Life-
sciences
 • North  
American Cen-
ter for CME, 
LLC*
 • Vox MediaNone None NOT RELEVANT
 • NIH*
 • NIHF*NOT RELEVANT
 • Brawerman Nursing Institute, 
Endowed Chair†
 • NLA
 • Novo Nordisk
 • NAMS
 • MJH Life Sciences, LLCNone
Ann Marie 
NavarUT Southwestern 
Medical Center—As-
sociate Professor of 
Medicine
Department of 
Medicine, Division of 
CardiologyRELEVANT
 • AstraZeneca*
 • Amgen*
 • Bayer*
 • Boehringer 
Ingelheim*
 • Bristol Myers 
Squibb*
 • CSL  
Behring*
 • Eli Lily and 
Company
 • Novartis*
 • NovoNordisk*
 • Pfizer*
 • Janssen Phar-
maceutical
 • New Amster-
dam Pharma-
ceutical
NOT RELEVANT
 • Cerner  
CorporationRELEVANT
 • VindicoNone RELEVANT
 • Bristol Myers Squibb*
 • Esperion*
 • Janssen Pharmaceuticals
 • Novartis*
 • Amgen*NOT RELEVANT
 • ACC
 • AHA
 • AHJ
 • American Journal of P 
reventive Cardiology
 • American Society for  
Preventive Cardiology
 • Asia Pacific Society of  
Cardiology
 • CardioNerds†
 • JAMA Cardiology
 • NHLBI
 • NIH
 • National Forum for Heart  
Disease & Stroke PreventionNoneAppendix 1. Continued
(Continued )
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on November 12, 2025

CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINESCirculation. 2023;148:e9–e119. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000001168 August 29, 2023
Virani et al 2023 AHA/ACC/ACCP/ASPC/NLA/PCNA Chronic Coronary Disease Guideline e117Committee 
Member Employment Consultant Speakers 
Bureau Ownership/ 
Partnership/ 
Principal Personal Research Institutional,  
Organizational, or Other  
Financial Benefit Expert Witness 
Amit R. 
Patel(Effective January 
2022)
University of Virginia 
Health System—
Professor of 
Medicine; Director, 
Noninvasive Cardiac 
Imaging
Cardiovascular 
Division
(through 12/2021)
University of Chi-
cago—
Associate Professor; 
Director Cardiac 
MRI and CT,
Department of Medi-
cine and RadiologyNone NOT RELEVANT
 • General  
ElectricNone NOT RELEVANT
 • Arterys†
 • ASE*
 • Circle CVI†
 • General Electric*
 • Journal of  
Cardiovascular  
Magnetic Resonance†
 • Neosoft†
 • NIH†
 • Philips*
 • Society of  
Cardiovascular  
Magnetic Resonance†
 • Society of  
Cardiovascular Com-
puted TomographyNOT RELEVANT
 • ACC
 • Amgen
 • APCA†
 • Apple*
 • AstraZeneca
 • General Electric*
 • Novartis
 • Pfizer
 • Smith & Nephew
 • The Very Good Food  
Company, Inc. *None
Mariann R. 
PianoVanderbilt University 
School of Nursing— 
Nancy and Hilliard 
Travis Professor of 
Nursing
Senior Associate 
Dean for ResearchNone None None None None None
Fatima  
RodriguezStanford University 
School of Medicine—
Associate Professor,
Section Chief of Pre-
ventive CardiologyRELEVANT
 • Amgen
 • Novartis
NOT RELEVANT
 • HealthPals*
 • MedscapeNone NOT RELEVANT
 • Carta†NOT RELEVANT
 • AHA
 • NIHRELEVANT
 • AstraZeneca
NOT RELEVANT
 • ACC
 • AHA
 • Cardiology and Therapy, 
Associate Editor
 • Medscape
 • NEJM Journal Watch  
Cardiology, Associate Editor
 • Novo Nordisk, CEAC*None
Amy W. 
Talbot§American Heart As-
sociation/American 
College of Cardiol-
ogy Science and 
Health Advisor, 
GuidelinesNone None None None None None
Viviany R. 
TaquetiBrigham and 
Women's Hospital; 
Harvard Medical 
School—  
Director, Cardiac 
Stress LaboratoryNone None None NOT RELEVANT
 • DOD, Warrior Trial 
(DSMB)RELEVANT
 • Abbott
 • Broadview Ventures*
NOT RELEVANT
 • ACC
 • Genetesis
 • NIH
 • ASNC, Board Member
 • NASEM, Committee Member, 
Identifying New/Improved 
Diagnostic & Evaluative  
TeachniquesNone
Randal J. 
ThomasMayo Clinic—  
Professor,
Department of 
Cardiovascular Medi-
cine, Division of Pre-
ventive CardiologyNone None None NOT RELEVANT
 • NHLBI†
 • NINR†NOT RELEVANT
 • AACVPR
 • AHA
 • JRCP†None
Sean van 
DiepenUniversity of Alberta, 
Edmonton, Alberta, 
Canada—Associate 
Professor, Depart-
ment of Critical 
Care Medicine and 
Division of Cardiol-
ogy, Department of 
MedicineNone None None None NOT RELEVANT
 • AHJ
 • Canadian Journal of  
Cardiology
 • European Heart Journal of 
Cardiovascular Care
 • JACC Adv. Sr. Consulting  
EditorNoneAppendix 1. Continued
(Continued )
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on November 12, 2025

CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINESAugust 29, 2023 Circulation. 2023;148:e9–e119. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000001168
Virani et al 2023 AHA/ACC/ACCP/ASPC/NLA/PCNA Chronic Coronary Disease Guideline e118Committee 
Member Employment Consultant Speakers 
Bureau Ownership/ 
Partnership/ 
Principal Personal Research Institutional,  
Organizational, or Other  
Financial Benefit Expert Witness 
Barbara 
WigginsSouth Carolina 
College of Phar-
macy—Affiliate 
Professor Medical 
University of South 
Carolina— Clinical 
Pharmacy Specialist-
CardiologyNOT RELEVANT
 • LexiCompNone None None NOT RELEVANT
 • ACC†
 • American Journal of Cardiovascu-
lar Drugs, Editorial Board†
 • PERT Consortium Clinical 
Protocols Committee†
 • scPharmaceuticals,  
(Salaried Employee)None
Marlene S. 
WilliamsJohns Hopkins Medi-
cal Institution
Bayview Medical 
Center—Associate 
Professor of Medi-
cine, Clinical Direc-
tor of Cardiology
Division of Cardiol-
ogy, Department of 
MedicineNOT RELEVANT
 • HaemoneticsNOT RELEVANT
 • National 
Association 
for  
Continuing 
EducationNone None NOT RELEVANT
 • ABC
 • ACC†
 • AHA
 • American Journal of  
Cardiovascular Drugs†
 • PERT Consortium†None
This table represents all relationships of committee members with industry and other entities that were reported by authors, including those not deemed to be relevant 
to this document, at the time this document was under development. The table does not necessarily reflect relationships with industry at the time of publication. A person 
is deemed to have a significant interest in a business if the interest represents ownership of ≥5% of the voting stock or share of the business entity, or ownership of 
≥$5000 of the fair market value of the business entity; or if funds received by the person from the business entity exceed 5% of the person’s gross income for the previ-
ous year. Relationships that exist with no financial benefit are also included for the purpose of transparency. Relationships in this table are modest unless otherwise noted. 
Please refer to https://www.acc.org/guidelines/about-guidelines-and-clinical-documents/relationships-with-industry-policy for definitions of disclosure categories or 
additional information about the ACC/AHA Disclosure Policy for Writing Committees.
*Significant relationship.
†No financial benefit.
‡This disclosure was entered under the Clinical Trial Enroller category in the ACC’s disclosure system. To appear in this category, the author acknowledges that there 
is no direct or institutional relationship with the trial sponsor as defined in the (ACCF or AHA/ACC) Disclosure Policy for Writing Committees.
§Amy Talbot is an AHA/ACC joint staff member and acts as the Science and Health Advisor for the “2023 AHA/ACC/ACCP/ASPC/NLA/PCNA Guideline for the 
Management of Patients With Chronic Coronary Disease.” No relevant relationships to report. Nonvoting author on measures and not included/counted in the RWI bal-
ance for this writing committee.
AACVPR indicates American Association of Cardiovascular and Pulmonary Rehabilitation; AATS, American Association for Thoracic Surgery; ABC, Association of 
Black Cardiologists; ACC, American College of Cardiology; ACCF, American College of Cardiology Foundation; ACCP, American College of Clinical Pharmacy; AHA, 
American Heart Association; AHJ, American Heart Journal; APCA, Alliance for Physician Certification and Advancement; APhA, American Pharmacists Association; ASE, 
American Society of Echocardiography; ASNC, American Society of Nuclear Cardiology; ASPC, American Society of Preventive Cardiology; CDC, US Centers for Disease 
Control and Prevention; CEAC, Clinical Event Adjudication Committee; CME, continuing medical education; DHHS, US Department of Health and Human Services; DOD, 
US Department of Defense; DSMB, data and safety monitoring board; ESC, European Society of Cardiology; FIC, Fogarty International Center; JACC, Journal of the 
American College of Cardiology; JAMA, Journal of the American Medical Association; JCRP, Journal of Cardiopulmonary Rehabilitation; NACCME, North American Center 
for Continuing Medical Education; NAMS, North American Menopause Society; NASEM, National Academies of Sciences, Engineering and Medicine; NEJM, New Eng-
land Journal of Medicine; NHLBI, National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute; NIH, National Institutes of Health; NLA, National Lipid Association; NINR, National Institute of 
Nursing Research; PAK-SEHAT, joint collaboration with Getz Pharma and Tabba Heart Institute; PCNA, Preventive Cardiovascular Nurses Association; PCORI, Patient-
Centered Outcomes Research Institute; PERT, Pulmonary Embolism Response Team; SCAI, Society for Cardiovascular Angiography and Interventions; UT, University of 
Texas, VA, Veterans Affairs; WCC, World Congress of Cardiology; and WHF, World Heart Federation.Appendix 1. Continued
Appendix 2. Reviewer Relationships With Industry and Other Entities—2023 AHA/ACC/ACCP/ASPC/NLA/PCNA Guideline for 
the Management of Patients With Chronic Coronary Disease
Reviewer Representation Employment Consultant Speakers 
Bureau Ownership/ 
Partnership/ 
Principal Personal Research Institutional,  
Organizational, or 
Other Financial 
Benefit Expert Witness 
H. Vernon 
AndersonAHA/ACC Chronic 
Coronary Disease 
Guideline Peer Review 
Committee ChairThe University 
of Texas Health 
Science Center 
at Houston • ACE None None None None None
Sunil V. Rao AHA/ACC Chronic 
Coronary Disease 
Guideline Peer Review 
Committee Vice ChairNew York  
UniversityNone None None  • NHLBI  • NHLBI‡  • Defendant, 
Cardiac  
catheteriza-
tion, 2021
Columbus 
Batiste IIAHA/ACC Chronic 
Coronary Disease Peer 
Review CommitteeKaiser Perman-
ente Riverside 
and Moreno 
Valley Medical 
CentersNone None None None None None
Roger Blu-
menthalAHA/ACC Chronic 
Coronary Disease Peer 
Review CommitteeJohns Hopkins 
UniversityNone None None None None None
(Continued )
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on November 12, 2025

CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINESCirculation. 2023;148:e9–e119. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000001168 August 29, 2023
Virani et al 2023 AHA/ACC/ACCP/ASPC/NLA/PCNA Chronic Coronary Disease Guideline e119Reviewer Representation Employment Consultant Speakers 
Bureau Ownership/ 
Partnership/ 
Principal Personal Research Institutional,  
Organizational, or 
Other Financial 
Benefit Expert Witness 
Matthew A. 
CavenderAHA/ACC Chronic 
Coronary Disease Peer 
Review CommitteeUNC School of 
Medicine • Amgen
 • Bayer*
 • Medtronic*
 • Novo Nordisk*
 • ZollNone None  • Amgen†
 • Boehringer  
Ingelheim*
 • CSL Behring† • Boston Scientific‡
 • Edwards‡
 • Novo Nordisk‡ • Third party, 
medical 
necessity, 
2022*
Anne Carol 
GoldbergAHA/ACC Chronic 
Coronary Disease Peer 
Review Committee, 
representing NLAWashington 
University 
School of  
Medicine • Akcea
 • Ionis*
 • Novartis
 • Regeneron • ACC
 • NLA* • Amgen*
 • Arrowhead  
Pharmaceuticals*
 • Esperion*
 • Ionis*
 • New Amsterdam*
 • Novartis*
 • Regeneron*
 • Sanofi-Aventis* • ABIM
 • AHA†
 • Esperion†
 • Ionis, TIMI, Lead 
coordinator,  
Triglyceride study*
 • New Amsterdam, 
National Coordinator 
for Brooklyn Study*
 • NLA Foundation†
 • NLA*
 • The FH FoundationNone
Cynthia 
JackeviciusAHA/ACC Chronic 
Coronary Disease Peer 
Review Committee, 
representing ACCPWestern  
University  
of Health  
SciencesNone None None  • CIHR
 • Circulation:  
Cardiovascular  
Quality and  
Outcomes • AHA
 • Western University  
of Health Sciences*None
Friederike 
K. KeatingAHA/ACC Chronic 
Coronary Disease Peer 
Review CommitteeUniversity of 
Vermont Medi-
cal CenterNone None None None  • ASNC†
 • NHLBI‡
 • University of  
Vermont Health 
Center†None
Thomas S. 
MetkusAHA/ACC Chronic 
Coronary Disease Peer 
Review CommitteeJohns Hopkins 
University 
School of Medi-
cine • BestDoctors- 
Telehealth*
 • McGraw-Hill*
 • Nova  
Biomedical
 • Oakstone- 
Ebix*None None None None None
Leslee J. 
ShawAHA/ACC Chronic 
Coronary Disease Peer 
Review CommitteeMount Sinai None None None None None None
Chloe D. 
VillavasoAHA/ACC Chronic 
Coronary Disease Peer 
Review Committee, 
representing PCNATulane Univer-
sity School of 
Medicine • Amgen
 • NovartisNone None None None None
Brittany A. 
Zwischen-
bergerAHA/ACC Chronic 
Coronary Disease Peer 
Review CommitteeDuke University None None None None  • DCRI†
 • STS†None
This table represents all reviewers’ relationships with industry and other entities that were reported at the time of peer review, including those not deemed to be relevant 
to this document, at the time this document was under review. The table does not necessarily reflect relationships with industry at the time of publication. A person is 
deemed to have a significant interest in a business if the interest represents ownership of ≥5% of the voting stock or share of the business entity, or ownership of ≥$5000 
of the fair market value of the business entity; or if funds received by the person from the business entity exceed 5% of the person’s gross income for the previous year. 
Relationships that exist with no financial benefit are also included for the purpose of transparency. Relationships in this table are modest unless otherwise noted. Please 
refer to http://www.acc.org/guidelines/about-guidelines-and-clinical-documents/relationships-with-industry-policy for definitions of disclosure categories or additional 
information about the ACC/AHA Disclosure Policy for Writing Committees.
*Significant relationship.
†No financial benefit.
‡This disclosure was entered under the Clinical Trial Enroller category in the ACC’s disclosure system. To appear in this category, the author acknowledges that there 
is no direct or institutional relationship with the trial sponsor as defined in the (ACCF or AHA/ACC) Disclosure Policy for Writing Committees.
ABIM indicates American Board of Internal Medicine; ACC, American College of Cardiology; ACCF, American College of Cardiology Foundation; ACCP, American 
College of Clinical Pharmacy; ACE, Accreditation for Cardiovascular Excellence; AHA, American Heart Association; ASNC, American Society of Nuclear Cardiology; 
ASPC, American Society of Preventive Cardiology; CIHR, Canadian Institutes of Health Research; DCRI, Duke Clinical Research Institute; FH, Family Heart; NHLBI, 
National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute; NLA, National Lipid Association; PCNA, Preventive Cardiovascular Nurses Association ; STS, Society of Thoracic Surgery; TIMI, 
Thrombolysis in Myocardial Infarction; and UNC, University of North Carolina.Appendix 2. Continued
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on November 12, 2025

