Copyright © 2020 American Society of Addiction Medicine. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.The ASAM National Practice Guideline for the Treatment of
Opioid Use Disorder: 2020 Focused Update
2020 Focused Update Guideline Committee members
(alpha order) :
Chinazo Cunningham, MD, MS, FASAM
Mark J. Edlund, MD, PhD
Marc Fishman, MD, DFASAM
Adam J. Gordon, MD, MPH, FACP, DFASAM
Hendre ´e E. Jones, PhD
Kyle M. Kampman, MD, FASAM, Chair
Daniel Langleben, MD
Marjorie Meyer, MD
Sandra Springer, MD, FASAM
George Woody, MD
Tricia E. Wright, MD, MS, FACOG, DFASAM
Stephen Wyatt, DO, FAOAAM, FASAM, Co-Chair
2019 Focused Update ASAM Quality Improvement Coun-
cil(alpha order) :
John Femino, MD, DFASAM
Kenneth Freedman, MD, MS, MBA, DFASAM, FACP,
AGAF Chair
R. Jeffrey Goldsmith, MD, DLFAPA, DFASAM
Barbara Herbert, MD, DFASAM
Margaret Jarvis, MD, DFASAM
Margaret Kotz, DO, DFASAM
P. Stephen Novack, DO, MHCDS
David R. Pating, MD, FASAM
Sandrine Pirard, MD, PhD, MPH, FAPA, FASAM
Maureen Boyle, PhD, ASAM Staff
Taleen Safarian, ASAM Staff
Leah White, ASAM Staff
2019 Focused Update Research Triangle Institute Interna-
tional (RTI) Team Members (alpha order) :
Karen Crotty, PhD, MPH, Principal Investigator
Mark Edlund, MD, PhD
Janice Tzeng, MPH
Meera Viswanathan, PhD
Brittany Zulkiewicz, BS
Disclosure information for the 2019 focused update
Guideline Committee members and the ASAM Quality
Improvement Council is available, respectively, in Appendi-
ces VII and VIII.
2015 Guideline Committee Members (alpha order) :
Sandra Comer, PhD
Chinazo Cunningham, MD, MS
Marc J. Fishman, MD, FASAM
Adam Gordon, MD, MPH, FASAMKyle Kampman, MD, Chair
Daniel Langleben, MD
Ben Nordstrom, MD, PhD
David Oslin, MD
George Woody, MD
Tricia Wright, MD, MS
Stephen Wyatt, DO
2015 ASAM Quality Improvement Council (alpha order) :
John Femino, MD, FASAM
Margaret Jarvis, MD, FASAM, Chair
Margaret Kotz, DO, FASAM
Sandrine Pirard, MD, MPH, PhD
Robert J. Roose, MD, MPH
Alexis Geier-Horan, ASAM Staff
Beth Haynes, ASAM Staff
Penny S. Mills, MBA, ASAM, Executive Vice-President
Special External Reviewer:
Michael M. Miller, MD, FASAM, FAPA
2015 Treatment Research Institute Technical Team Mem-
bers (alpha order) :
Amanda Abraham, PhD
Karen Dugosh, PhD
David Festinger, PhD
Kyle Kampman, MD, Principal Investigator
Keli McLoyd, JD
Brittany Seymour, BA
Abigail Woodworth, MS
Disclosure information for the 2015 Guideline Com-
mittee members, the ASAM Quality Improvement Council,
and external reviewers is available respectively in Appendices
IV, V, and VI
ASAM is honored that this clinical practice guideline
has been endorsed by:
American Academy of Physician Assistants
American Association of Nurse Anesthetists
American College of Nurse-Midwives
American College of Preventive Medicine
American Osteopathic Academy of Addiction Medicine
Federation of State Physician Health Programs
International Nurses Society on Addictions
National Association of Addiction Treatment Providers
Table of Contents
Abbreviations and Acronyms 3
National Practice Guideline Glossary 3
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY 7
Purpose 7
Background Updated 7
Scope of Guideline 8
Intended Audience 8
Qualifying Statement 8Received for publication January 8, 2020; accepted January 13, 2020.
Copyright /C2232020 American Society of Addiction Medicine
ISSN: 1932-0620/20/1402S-0001
DOI: 10.1097/ADM.0000000000000633
/C15Adopted by the ASAM Board of Directors December 18, 2019 1CLINICAL PRACTICE GUIDELINE
Copyright © 2020 American Society of Addiction Medicine. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.Overview of Methodology 8
2019 Focused Update New 8
Summary of Recommendations 10
INTRODUCTION 17
Purpose 17
Background on Opioid Use Disorder 17
Epidemiology 17
Mortality and Morbidity 17
Scope of Guideline 18
Included and Excluded Medications 18
Intended Audience 18
Qualifying Statement 18
METHODOLOGY 19
Overview of Approach 19
2015 Guideline Development 19
2019 Focused Update New 21
PART 1: ASSESSMENT AND DIAGNOSIS OF OPIOID USE
DISORDER22
Comprehensive Assessment 22
Medical History 22
Physical Examination 23
Assessment and History Considerations Specific to Females 23
Laboratory Tests 23
Assessment for Mental Health Status and Psychiatric Disorder 23
Assessment for Substance Use and Treatment History 24
Assessment for Co-occurring Substance Use 24
Assessment for Nicotine Use 24
Assessment of Psychosocial and Environmental Factors 25
Diagnosing Opioid Use Disorder 25
DSM-5 Criteria for Diagnosis 25
Summary of Recommendations 26
PART 2: TREATMENT OPTIONS 27
Introduction 27
Pharmacotherapy Options 27
Opioid Dosing Considerations: Opioid Use Disorder Versus Chronic
Pain28
Efficacy Considerations 28
Medication Management 31
Length of Treatment 32
PART 3: TREATING OPIOID WITHDRAWAL 33
Background 33
Assessment of Patients for Opioid Withdrawal 33
Medications in Opioid Withdrawal 34
Summary of Recommendations – Treating Opioid Withdrawal 35
PART 4: METHADONE 36
Background 36
PATIENT SELECTION AND TREATMENT GOALS 36
COURSE OF TREATMENT 36
TRANSITIONING BETWEEN TREATMENT MEDICATIONS 38
Summary of Recommendations – Methadone 39
PART 5: BUPRENORPHINE 39
Background 39
Formulations of Buprenorphine 40
Patient Selection and Treatment Goals 40
Precautions 40
Dosing 42
Length of Treatment 43
Transitioning Between Treatment Medications 43
Summary of Recommendations – Buprenorphine 44
PART 6: NALTREXONE 44
Background 44
Formulations of Naltrexone: Oral Versus Extended-Release
Injectable45
Patient Selection and Treatment Goals 45
Oral Naltrexone 45
Extended-Release Injectable Naltrexone 45
Precautions 45
Risk of Relapse and Subsequent Opioid Overdose 45
Course of Treatment 45
Initiation 45
Dosing 46
Adverse Effects 46Transitioning Between Treatment Medications 47
Summary of Recommendations – Naltrexone 47
PART 7: PSYCHOSOCIAL TREATMENT IN CONJUNCTION
WITH MEDICATIONS FOR THE TREATMENT OF OPIOID
USE DISORDER47
Background 47
Goals of Psychosocial Treatment for Opioid Use Disorder 48
Components of Psychosocial Treatment for Opioid Use Disorder 48
Efficacy of Psychosocial Treatments in Opioid Use Disorder 48
Peer Support and Mutual-Help Programs 48
Adherence to Psychosocial Treatment Within Overall Treatment 49
Psychosocial Treatment and Treatment with Methadone,
Buprenorphine, or Naltrexone49
Summary of Recommendations – Psychosocial Treatment in
Conjunction With Medications for the Treatment of Opioid Use
Disorder49
PART 8: SPECIAL POPULATIONS: PREGNANT WOMEN 49
Background 49
Assessment of Opioid Use Disorder in Pregnant Women 50
Medical Examination 50
Opioid Agonist Treatment in Pregnancy 51
Naltrexone in Pregnancy 51
Naloxone in Pregnancy 51
Methadone Initiation 51
Buprenorphine Initiation 52
Dosing of Opioid Agonists During Pregnancy 52
Postpartum Treatment 52
Breastfeeding 53
Summary of Recommendations – Special Populations: Pregnant
Women53
PART 9: SPECIAL POPULATIONS: INDIVIDUALS WITH PAIN 54
Background 54
General Considerations for All Patients With Pain 54
Pain Management in Patients with Opioid Use Disorder 54
Buprenorphine and Pain Management 55
Naltrexone and Pain Management 55
Considerations for Surgery 55
Summary of Recommendations – Special Populations: Individuals
With Pain56
PART 10: SPECIAL POPULATIONS: ADOLESCENTS 57
Background 57
Confidentiality in Treatment 57
Pharmacotherapy Options for Adolescents 57
Opioid Agonists: Methadone and Buprenorphine 57
Efficacy Research on Agonists and Partial Agonists in Adolescents 57
Opioid Antagonist: Naltrexone 57
Psychosocial Treatment for Adolescents 57
Summary of Recommendations – Special Populations: Adolescents 58
PART 11: SPECIAL POPULATIONS: INDIVIDUALS WITH CO-
OCCURRING PSYCHIATRIC DISORDERS58
Background 58
Assessment of Psychiatric Co-occurrence 58
Co-occurring Psychiatric Disorders and Suicide Risk 59
Considerations with Specific Psychiatric Disorders 59
Co-occurring Psychiatric Disorders and Agonist Treatment 59
Co-occurring Psychiatric Disorders and Antagonist Treatment 59
Summary of Recommendations – Special Populations: Individuals
With Co-occurring Psychiatric Disorders59
PART 12: SPECIAL POPULATIONS: INDIVIDUALS IN THE
CRIMINAL JUSTICE SYSTEM60
Background 60
Effectiveness of Pharmacotherapy 60
Treatment Options 61
Summary of Recommendations – Special Populations: Individuals
in the Criminal Justice System62
PART 13: NALOXONE FOR THE prevention OF OPIOID
OVERDOSE DEATH62
Introduction 62
Patients and Significant Others/Family Members 63
Individuals Trained and Authorized to Use Naloxone 63
Safety and Efficacy of Bystander Administered Naloxone 63
Routes of Administration 63White et el. /C15Adopted by the ASAM Board of Directors December 18, 2019
2 /C2232020 American Society of Addiction Medicine
Copyright © 2020 American Society of Addiction Medicine. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.Summary of Recommendations – Naloxone for the Treatment
of Opioid Overdose63
PART 14: AREAS FOR FURTHER RESEARCH 64
Assessment and Diagnosis of Opioid Use Disorder (Part 1) 64
Treatment Options (Part 2) 64
Opioid Withdrawal Management (Part 3) 64
Methadone (Part 4) 64
Buprenorphine (Part 5) 64
Naltrexone (Part 6) 64
Psychosocial Treatment in Conjunction With Medications for the
Treatment of Opioid Use Disorder (Part 7)65
Special Populations: Pregnant Women (Part 8) 65
Special Population: Individuals With Pain (Part 9) 65
Special Populations: Adolescents (Part 10) 65
Special Populations: Individuals With Co-Occurring Psychiatric
Disorders (Part 11)65
Special Populations: Individuals in the Criminal Justice System
(Part 12)65
Naloxone for the Treatment of Opioid Overdose (Part 13) 65
References 66
APPENDICES 71
Appendix I: Included Clinical Guidelines and Systematic Reviews: 71
Appendix II: Bioequivalence Information and Charts 75
Appendix III: Overview of Opioid Use Disorder Pharmacotherapy
Options76
Appendix IV: Available Pharmacotherapy Formulations 77
Appendix V: 2019 Guideline Committee Member Relationships with
Industry and Other Entities78
Appendix VI: 2019 ASAM Board of Directors Relationships with
Industry and Other Entities81
Appendix VII: 2019 ASAM Quality Improvement Council (Oversight
Committee) Relationships with Industry and Other Entities87
Appendix VIII: External Reviewer Relationships with Industry and
Other Entities (2019 Guideline Development Process)88
Abbreviations and Acronyms
AA – Alcoholics Anonymous
ACOG – American College of Obstetrics and Gynecology
ACT – Assertive Community Treatment
AIDS – Acquired Immunodeficiency Syndrome
ASAM – American Society of Addiction Medicine
CBT – Cognitive Behavioral Therapy
CDC – Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
CNS – Central Nervous System
COWS – Clinical Opioid Withdrawal Scale
DATA 2000 – Drug Addiction Treatment Act of 2000
DEA – Drug Enforcement Agency
DSM-4 – Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental
Disorders, 4th Edition
DSM-5 – Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental
Disorders, 5th Edition
ECG – Electrocardiogram
EMS – Emergency Medical Services
FDA – U.S. Food and Drug Administration
HBV – Hepatitis B Virus
HCV – Hepatitis C Virus
HIV – Human Immunodeficiency Virus
IDU – Injection Drug Use
IM – Intramuscular
IV – Intravenous
NA – Narcotics Anonymous
NAS Neonatal Absence Syndrome
NIH – National Institutes of HealthNIDA – National Institute on Drug Abuse
NIAAA – National Institute on Alcohol Abuse
and Alcoholism
NOWS – Neonatal Opioid Withdrawal Syndrome
NSAIDs – Nonsteroidal Anti-inflammatory Drugs
NSDUH – National Survey on Drug Use and Health
OBOT – Office-Based Opioid Treatment
OOWS – Objective Opioid Withdrawal Scale
OTP – Opioid Treatment Program
PMDP – Prescription Drug Monitoring Program
RCT – Randomized Controlled Trial
RAM – RAND/UCLA Appropriateness Method
SAMHSA – Substance Abuse and Mental Health
Services Administration
SMART – Self-Management and Recovery Therapy
SOWS – Subjective Opioid Withdrawal Scale
TB – Tuberculosis
UROD – Ultra-rapid Opioid Detoxification
National Practice Guideline Glossary
Abstinence: Intentional and consistent restraint from
the pathological pursuit of reward and/or relief that involves
the use of substances and other behaviors. These behaviors
may involve, but are not necessarily limited to substance use,
gambling, video gaming, or compulsive sexual behaviors.1
Use of FDA approved medications for the treatment of
substance use disorder is consistent with abstinence.
Abuse: This term is not recommended for use in clinical
or research contexts. Harmful use of a specific psychoactive
substance. When used to mean substance abuse, this term
previously applied to one category of psychoactive substance-
related disorders in the DSM. While recognizing that the term
abuse is part of past diagnostic terminology, ASAM recom-
mends that an alternative term be found for this purpose
because of the pejorative connotations of the word abuse.
Addiction: Addiction is a treatable, chronic medical dis-
ease involving complex interactions among brain circuits, genet-
ics, the environment, and an individual’s life experiences. People
with addiction use substances or engage in behaviors that become
compulsive and often continue despite harmful consequences.
Prevention efforts and treatme nt approaches for addiction are
generally as successful as those for other chronic diseases.
Addiction specialist clinician: A health professional
involved in the assessment, diagnosis, and treatment of addic-
tion, such as a physician, psychologist, nurse practitioners
(NPs), physician assistants (PA), clinical nurse specialists,
certified registered nurse anesthetists, certified nurse mid-
wives (as distinguished from one specializing in research).
Addiction specialist physician: Addiction specialist
physicians include addiction medicine physicians and addic-
tion psychiatrists who hold either a subspecialty board certi-
fication in addiction medicine from the American Board of
Preventive Medicine, a board certification in addiction medi-
cine from the American Board of Addiction Medicine, a
subspecialty board certification in addiction psychiatry from
the American Board of Psychiatry and Neurology, a subspe-
cialty board certification in addiction medicine from the
American Osteopathic Association, or certification in addic-
tion medicine from ASAM./C15Adopted by the ASAM Board of Directors December 18, 2019 NPG for the Treatment of Opioid Use Disorder
/C2232020 American Society of Addiction Medicine 3
Copyright © 2020 American Society of Addiction Medicine. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.Adherence (see also compliance) : Adherence is a term
that health professionals have been using increasingly to
replace the term compliance. Both terms have been used,
sometimes interchangeably, to refer to how closely patients
cooperate with, follow, and take personal responsibility for the
implementation of their treatment plans. The terms may be
narrowly applied to how well patients follow medication
instructions or, more broadly, to all components of treatment.
Assessment of patients’ efforts to accomplish the goals of a
treatment plan is essential to treatment success. These efforts
occur along a complex spectrum from independent proactive
commitment, to mentored collaboration, to passive coopera-
tion, to reluctant partial agreement, to active resistance, and to
full refusal. Attempts to understand factors that promote or
inhibit adherence/compliance must take into account behav-
iors, attitudes, willingness, and varying degrees of capacity
and autonomy. The term adherence emphasizes the patient’s
collaboration and participation in treatment. It contributes to a
greater focus on motivational enhancement approaches that
engage and empower patients.
Adolescence: The American Academy of Pediatrics
categorizes adolescence as the totality of three developmental
stages (early-, middle- and late-adolescence) —puberty to
adulthood —that occur generally between 11 and 21 years
of age.1This clinically-driven definition may differ from
legal definitions.
Agonist medication: See Opioid Agonist Medication.
Antagonist medication: See Opioid Antagonist Medi-
cation.
ASAM Criteria dimensions: The ASAM Criteria use
six dimensions to define a holistic biopsychosocial assess-
ment of an individual to be used for service and treatment
planning including: acute intoxication or withdrawal poten-
tial; biomedical conditions and complications; emotional,
behavioral, or cognitive conditions or complications; readi-
ness for change; continued use or continued problem poten-
tial; and recovery/living environment.2
Assertive community treatment (ACT): An evidence-
based, outreach-oriented, service delivery model for people
with severe and persistent mental illness(es) that uses a
team-based model to provide comprehensive and flexible
treatment.
Clinician: A health professional involved in the assess-
ment, diagnosis, and treatment of medical problems, such as a
physician, psychologist, nurse practitioners (NPs), physician
assistants (PA), clinical nurse specialists, certified registered
nurse anesthetists, certified nurse midwives (as distinguished
from one specializing in research).
Cognitive behavioral therapy: An evidence-based
psychosocial intervention that seeks to modify harmful beliefs
and maladaptive behaviors, and help patients recognize,
avoid, and cope with the situations in which they are most
likely to misuse substances.
Co-occurring disorders: Concurrent substance use and
physical or mental disorders. Other terms used to describe co-
occurring disorders include dual diagnosis, dual disorders,
concurrent disorders, coexisting disorders, comorbid disor-
ders, and individuals with co-occurring psychiatric and sub-
stance symptomatology (ICOPSS). Use of the term carries noimplication as to which disorder is primary and which sec-
ondary, which disorder occurred first, or whether one disorder
caused the other.
Compliance: See also Adherence. To comply is ‘‘to
act in accordance with another’s wishes, or with rules and
regulations’’ (Webster’s Dictionary). The term compliance
is falling into disuse becaus e patient engagement and
responsibility to change is a goal beyond passive compli-
ance. Given the importance of shared decision-making to
improve collaboration and outcomes, patients are encour-
aged to actively participate in treatment decisions and
take responsibility for their tr eatment, rather than to pas-
sively comply.
Concomitant conditions: Medical conditions (e.g.,
HIV, cardiovascular disease) and/or psychiatric conditions
(e.g., depression, schizophrenia) that occur along with a
substance use disorder.
Contingency management: An evidence-based psy-
chosocial intervention in which patients are given tangible
rewards to reinforce positive behaviors such as treatment
participation or abstinence. Also referred to as motivational
incentives.
Criminal Justice System: Consists of law enforcement
agencies, courts and accompanying prosecution and defense
lawyers, and agencies for detaining and supervising offenders.
The total correctional population is the population of persons
incarcerated, either in a prison or a jail, and persons super-
vised in the community, either through problem solving courts
or on probation or parole.
Dependence: Used in three different ways: physical
dependence is a state of neurological adaptation that is
manifested by a drug class-specific withdrawal syndrome
that can be produced by abrupt cessation, rapid dose reduc-
tion, decreasing blood level of the drug, and/or administration
of an antagonist; psychological dependence is a subjective
sense of need for a specific psychoactive substance, either for
its positive effects or to avoid negative effects associated with
its abstinence; and one category of psychoactive substance use
disorder in previous editions of the DSM, but not in DSM-5.3
Harm reduction: A treatment and prevention approach
that encompasses individual and public health needs, aiming
to decrease the health and socioeconomic costs and conse-
quences of substance use and addiction-related problems,
especially medical complications and transmission of infec-
tious diseases, without necessarily requiring abstinence. A
range of treatment and recovery support activities may be
included in a harm reduction strategy.
Initiation (office and home): The phase of opioid use
disorder treatment during which medication dosage levels are
adjusted until a patient attains stabilization. Buprenorphine
initiation may take place in an office-based setting or home-
based setting. By regulation, methadone initiation must take
place in an OTP or acute care setting (under limited circum-
stances).4,5The previous version of these guidelines used the
term induction. While the meaning is the same in this context,
the Guideline Committee noted that this language did not
align with the terminology used for other medical conditions
and can make the process sound more difficult and complex
than it is.White et el. /C15Adopted by the ASAM Board of Directors December 18, 2019
4 /C2232020 American Society of Addiction Medicine
Copyright © 2020 American Society of Addiction Medicine. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.Illicit opioid use (including nonmedical use): Use of
an illicit opioid or the use of a prescribed medicine for reasons
other than those intended by the prescriber, for example, to
produce positive or negative reward. Nonmedical use of pre-
scription drugs often includes use of a drug in higher doses than
authorized by the prescriber or through a different route of
administration than intended by the prescriber, and for a
purpose other than the indication intended by the prescriber
(e.g., the use of methylphenidate prescribed for attention deficit
hyperactivity disorder [ADHD] to produce euphoria rather than
to reduce symptoms or dysfunction from ADHD).
Maintenance medication(s): Pharmacotherapy on a
consistent schedule for persons with addiction, usually with
an agonist or partial agonist, which mitigates against the
pathological pursuit of reward and/or relief and allows remis-
sion of overt addiction-related problems.
Maintenance medications for addiction are associated
with the development of a pharmacological steady state in
which receptors for addictive substances are occupied, result-
ing in relative or complete blockade of central nervous system
receptors such that addictive substances are no longer sought
for reward and/or relief. Maintenance medications for addic-
tion are also designed to mitigate against the risk of overdose.
Depending on the circumstances of a given case, maintenance
medications can be temporary or can remain in place lifelong.
Integration of pharmacotherapy with psychosocial treatment
generally is associated with the best clinical results. Mainte-
nance medications can be part of an individual’s treatment
plan in abstinence-based recovery activities or can be a part of
harm reduction strategies.
Medication management: S ervices that focus on the
appropriateness, effectiveness, and safety of medications for a
given patient. These services include monitoring and evalu-
ating the patient’s response to medication (including ongoing
misuse of substances); dose titration as clinically indicated;
education to ensure the patient understands their treatment
plan, how to take their medications, potential side effects, and
the importance of adherence; and provision of recommenda-
tions for other treatment and recovery support services as
indicated. These services are intended to promote ongoing
engagement in treatment, optimize the patient’s medication
response, and prevent relapse.
Moderation management: Moderation management is
a behavioral change program and national support group
network for people concerned about their drinking and who
desire to make positive lifestyle changes. MM empowers
individuals to accept personal responsibility for choosing
and maintaining their own path, whether moderation or
abstinence. MM promotes early self-recognition of risky
drinking behavior, when moderate drinking is a more easily
achievable goal.
Motivational interviewing:
1.Layperson’s definition: A collaborative conversation style
for strengthening a person’s own motivation and commit-
ment to change.
2.Practitioner’s definition: A person-centered counseling
style for addressing the common problem of ambivalence
about change.3.Technical definition: A collaborative, goal-oriented style
of communication with particular attention to the language
of change. It is designed to strengthen personal motivation
for and commitment to a specific goal by eliciting and
exploring the person’s own reasons for change within an
atmosphere of acceptance and compassion.
Naloxone challenge: Naloxone is a short-acting opioid
antagonist. Naloxone challenge is a test in which naloxone is
administered to patients to evaluate their level of opioid
dependence before the commencement of naltrexone phar-
macotherapy.
Naltrexone-facilitated opioid withdrawal manage-
ment: This is a method of withdrawal management that
involves the use of multiple small doses of naltrexone,
sometimes in combination with buprenorphine, over several
days to manage withdrawal and facilitate the initiation of
treatment with naltrexone.4
Narcotic drugs: Legally defined by the Controlled
Substances Act in the United States since its enactment in
1970. The term narcotic is broad and can include drugs
produced directly or indirectly by extraction from substances
of vegetable origin, or independently by means of chemical
synthesis, or by a combination of extraction and chemical
synthesis. The main compounds defined as narcotics in the
United States include: opium, opiates, derivatives of opium
and opiates, including their isomers, esters, ethers, salts, and
salts of isomers, esters, ethers (but not the isoquinoline
alkaloids of opium), poppy straw and concentrate of poppy
straw, coca leaves, cocaine, its salts, optical and geometric
isomers, and salts of isomers and ecgonine, its derivatives,
their salts, isomers, and salts of isomers. Any compound,
mixture, or preparation which contains any quantity of any of
the substances referred to above.
Neuroadaptation: See Tolerance for the definition.
Office-based opioid treatment (OBOT): Clinicians in
private practices or several types of public sector clinics that
can be authorized to prescribe the partial opioid agonist
buprenorphine in outpatient settings. There is no regulation,
per se, of the clinic site itself, but of the individual clinician
who prescribes buprenorphine.
Opiate: One of a group of alkaloids derived from the
opium poppy (Papaver somniferum) , with the ability to induce
analgesia, euphoria, and, in higher doses, stupor, coma, and
respiratory depression. The term excludes synthetic opioids.
Opioid: A current term for any psychoactive chemical
that resembles morphine in pharmacological effects, includ-
ing opiates and synthetic/semisynthetic agents that exert their
effects by binding to highly selective receptors in the brain
where morphine and endogenous opioids affect their actions.
Opioid agonist medication: Opioid agonist medica-
tions pharmacologically occupy and activate opioid receptors
in the body. They thereby relieve withdrawal symptoms and
reduce or extinguish cravings for opioids.
Opioid antagonist medication: Opioid antagonist
medications pharmacologically occupy opioid receptors,
but do not activate the receptors. This effectively blocks
the receptor, preventing the brain from responding to other
opioids. The result is that further use of opioids does not
produce analgesia, euphoria or intoxication.1/C15Adopted by the ASAM Board of Directors December 18, 2019 NPG for the Treatment of Opioid Use Disorder
/C2232020 American Society of Addiction Medicine 5
Copyright © 2020 American Society of Addiction Medicine. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.Opioid intoxication: A condition that may follow the
administration of opioids, resultin g in disturbances in the level of
consciousness, cognition, perceptio n, judgment, affect, behavior,
or other psychophysiological functions and responses. These
disturbances are related to the acute pharmacological effects
of, and learned responses to, o pioids. With time, these distur-
bances resolve, resulting in complete recovery, except when
tissue damage or other complicatio ns have arisen. Intoxication
depends on the type and dose of opioid and is influenced by
factors such as an individual’s level of tolerance. Individuals often
take drugs in the quantity required to achieve a desired degree of
intoxication. Behavior resulting f rom a given level of intoxication
is strongly influenced by cultural and personal expectations about
the effects of the drug. Accordin g to the International Classi-
fications of Diseases-10 (ICD-10 ), acute intoxication is the term
used for intoxication of clinical significance (F11.0). Complica-
tions may include trauma, inhala tion of vomitus, delirium, coma,
and convulsions, depending on the substance and method of
administration.
Opioid treatment program (OTP): A program certi-
fied by the United States, Substance Abuse and Mental Health
Services Administration (SAMHSA), to treat patients with
opioid use disorder using methadone. There programs may
also offer treatment with buprenorphine and/or naltrexone. An
OTP can exist in several settings including, but not limited to,
intensive outpatient, residential, and hospital settings. Ser-
vices may include medically supervised withdrawal and/or
maintenance treatment, along with various levels of medical,
psychiatric, psychosocial, and other types of supportive care.
Opioid treatment services: An umbrella term that
encompass a variety of pharmacological and nonpharmaco-
logical treatment modalities. This term broadens understand-
ing of opioid treatments to include all medications used to
treat opioid use disorders and the psychosocial treatment that
is offered concurrently with these pharmacotherapies. Phar-
macological agents include opioid agonist medications such
as methadone and buprenorphine, and opioid antagonist
medications such as naltrexone.
Opioid use disorder: A substance use disorder involv-
ing opioids. See Substance Use Disorder.
Opioid withdrawal management: Usually used to
refer to a process of withdrawing a person from a specific
psychoactive substance in a safe and effective manner. The
term encompasses safe management of intoxication states
(more literally, detoxification) and of withdrawal states. In
this document, the term detoxification has been replaced by
the term withdrawal management.2
Opioid withdrawal: Over time, opioids induce toler-
ance and neuroadaptive changes that are responsible for
rebound hyperexcitability when the drug is withdrawn. The
withdrawal syndrome includes craving, anxiety, dysphoria,
yawning, sweating, piloerection (gooseflesh), lacrimation
(excessive tear formation), rhinorrhea (running nose), insom-
nia, nausea or vomiting, diarrhea, cramps, muscle aches, and
fever. With short-acting drugs, such as morphine or heroin,
withdrawal symptoms may appear within 8–12 hours of the
last dose of the drug, reach a peak at 48–72 hours, and clear
after 7–10 days. With longer-acting drugs, such as metha-
done, onset of withdrawal symptoms may not occur until 1–3days after the last dose; symptoms peak between the third and
eighth day and may persist for several weeks.
Overdose: The inadvertent or deliberate consumption
of a dose much larger than that either habitually used by the
individual or ordinarily used for treatment of an illness, that
results in a serious toxic reaction or death.
Patient: As used in this document, an individual receiv-
ing substance use disorder treatment. The terms client and
patient sometimes are used interchangeably, although staff in
nonmedical settings more commonly refer to clients.
Physical dependence: State of physical adaptation that
is manifested by a drug class-specific withdrawal syndrome
that can be produced by abrupt cessation, rapid dose reduc-
tion, and/or decreasing blood level of a substance and/or
administration of an antagonist.
Psychosocial interventions : Nonpharmacological
interventions that may include structured, professionally
administered interventions (e.g., cognitive behavior therapy
or insight-oriented psychotherapy) or nonprofessional inter-
ventions (e.g., self-help groups and non-pharmacological
interventions from traditional healers).
Psychosocial treatment: Any nonpharmacological. pro-
fessionally administered interventions (e.g., cognitive behavior
therapy or insight-oriented psychotherapy) carried out in a
therapeutic context at an individual, family, or group level.
Precipitated withdrawal: A condition that occurs
when an opioid agonist is displaced from the opioid receptors
by an antagonist in an opioid dependent individual. It is also
possible for a partial agonist to precipitate withdrawal.
Recovery: A process of sustained action that addresses
the biological, psychological, social, and spiritual disturbances
inherent in addiction. This effort is in the direction of a consistent
pursuit of abstinence, addressing impairment in behavioral
control, dealing with cravings, recognizing problems in one’s
behaviors and interpersonal relationships, and dealing more
effectively with emotional responses. Recovery actions lead to
reversal of negative, self-defeating internal processes and behav-
iors, allowing healing of relationships with self and others. The
concepts of humility, acceptance, and surrender are useful in this
process. (Note: ASAM continues to explore, as an evolving
process, improved ways to define recovery.)
Remission : A state associated with an abatement of
signs and symptoms that characterize active addiction. Many
individuals in a remission state remain actively engaged in the
process of recovery. Reduction in signs or symptoms con-
stitutes improvement in a disease state, but remission involves
a return to a level of functioning that is free of active
symptoms and/or is marked by stability in the chronic signs
and symptoms that characterize active addiction.
Relapse: A process in which an individual who has
established disease remission experiences recurrence of signs
and symptoms of active addiction, often including resumption
of the pathological pursuit of reward and/or relief through
the use of substances and other behaviors. When in relapse,
there is often disengagement from recovery activities. Relapse
can be triggered by exposure to rewarding substances
and behaviors, by exposure to environmental cues to use,
and by exposure to emotional stressors that trigger heightened
activity in brain stress circuits. The event of using substancesWhite et el. /C15Adopted by the ASAM Board of Directors December 18, 2019
6 /C2232020 American Society of Addiction Medicine
Copyright © 2020 American Society of Addiction Medicine. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.or re-engaging in addictive behaviors is the latter part of the
process, which can be prevented by early intervention.
Sedative, hypnotic, or anxiolytics: This class of sub-
stances includes all prescription sleeping medications and
most prescription antianxiety medications (e.g. benzodiaze-
pines, Z-medications, and gabapentinoids). Nonbenzodiaze-
pine antianxiety medications, such as buspirone and gepirone,
are not included in this class because they are not associated
with significant misuse.
Sobriety: A state of sustained abstinence with a clear
commitment to and active seeking of balance in the biologi-
cal, psychological, social, and spiritual aspects of an individ-
ual’s health and wellness that were previously compromised
by active addiction.
Spontaneous withdrawal: A condition that occurs when
an individual who is physically dependent on an opioid agonist
suddenly discontinues or markedly decreases opioid use.
Stabilization: Attainment of a medically stable, steady
state in which the patient is adequately supported to prevent
deterioration of their illness.
Substance use disorder: Substance use disorder is
marked by a cluster of cognitive, behavioral, and physiological
symptoms indicating that the individual continues to use alcohol,
nicotine, and/or other drugs despite significant related problems.
Diagnostic criteria are given in the DSM-5.5Substance use
disorder is the new nomenclature for what was included as
substance dependence and substance abuse in the DSM-4.6
Tolerance: A decrease in response to a drug dose that
occurs with continued use. If an individual is tolerant to a
drug, increased doses are required to achieve the effects
originally produced by lower doses. Both physiological and
psychosocial factors may contribute to the development of
tolerance. Physiological factors include metabolic and func-
tional tolerance. In metabolic tolerance, the body can elimi-
nate the substance more readily, because the substance is
metabolized at an increased rate. In functional tolerance, the
central nervous system is less sensitive to the substance. An
example of a psychosocial factor contributing to tolerance is
behavioral tolerance, when learning or altered environmental
constraints change the effect of the drug. Acute tolerance
refers to rapid, temporary accommodation to the effect of a
substance after a single dose. Reverse tolerance, also known
as sensitization, refers to a condition in which the response to
a substance increased with repeated use. Tolerance is one of
the criteria of the dependence syndrome.
Withdrawal management: Withdrawal management
describes services to assist a patient’s withdrawal. The liver
detoxifies, but clinicians manage withdrawal.
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
Purpose
The American Society of Addiction Medicine (ASAM)
developed this National Practice Guideline for the Treatment
of Opioid Use Disorder to provide information on evidence-
based treatment of opioid use disorder. (Hereafter, in this
document, this National Practice Guideline will be referred
to as Practice Guideline .) This guideline is an update and
replacement of the 2015 ASAM National Practice Guidelinefor the Use of Medications in the Treatment of Addiction
Involving Opioid Use.7
Background Updated
Opioid use disorder is a brain disorder that can range in
severity from mild to severe. Diagnosis of this disorder is based
on a checklist of symptoms defined in the Diagnostic and
Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, 5th Edition (DSM-5)
developed by the American Psychiatric Association.5
ASAM defines addiction as ‘‘a treatable, chronic medi-
cal disease involving complex interactions among brain cir-
cuits, genetics, the environment, and an individual’s life
experiences. People with addiction use substances or engage
in behaviors that become compulsive and often continue
despite harmful consequences.’’ Addiction is a serious biopsy-
chosocial illness, meaning that biological, psychological, and
social factors can all contribute to both the development of,
and recovery from, this disease. The ASAM Criteria (dis-
cussed in Part 1) provide a framework for assessing how
diverse biopsychosocial factors contribute to an individual
patient’s addiction and the type and intensity of treatment
needed to support their recovery.2ASAM views addiction as
fundamentally a neurological disease involving brain reward,
motivation, memory, and related circuitry, and recognizes that
there are unifying features in all cases of addiction, including
substance-related addiction and nonsubstance-related addic-
tion. In this context, the preferred term by ASAM for this
disorder is addiction involving opioid use.
A variety of substances commonly associated with
addiction work on specific receptors and neurotransmitter
systems in the nervous system. Pharmacological agents used
in the treatment of addiction exert their effects via actions on
specific receptors. Hence, the medications used in the treat-
ment of addiction have efficacy based on their own molecular
structure and the particular neurotransmitter receptors
affected by that medication. Medications developed for the
treatment of addiction involving opioid use may have benefits
in the treatment of addiction involving an individual’s use of
other substances. For instance, naltrexone, which is approved
by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) for the
treatment of opioid dependence (using DSM, 4thEdition
[DSM-4] terminology), is also FDA-approved for the treat-
ment of alcohol dependence (DSM-4).6
ASAM encourages clinicians, researchers, educators,
and policy makers to use the term ‘‘addiction involving ’’
regardless of whether the patient’s condition at a given point
in its natural history seems to more prominently involve opioid
use, alcohol use, nicotine use, or engagement in addictive
behaviors such as gambling. However, given the widespread
North American application of the DSM’s categorization of
disorders, this Practice Guideline will, for the sake of brevity
and convention, use the term opioid use disorder.
In 2018, an estimated 10.3 million people in the United
States misused opioids (representing 3.7% of the population
aged 12 or older), including 9.9 million people who misused
pain relievers, and 808,000 who misused heroin.8The 2018
National Survey of Drug Use and Health (NSDUH) further
found that 2.0 million persons in America met DSM-4 criteria
for opioid use disorder.8/C15Adopted by the ASAM Board of Directors December 18, 2019 NPG for the Treatment of Opioid Use Disorder
/C2232020 American Society of Addiction Medicine 7
Copyright © 2020 American Society of Addiction Medicine. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.Opioid misuse is associated with increased morbidity
and mortality. The leading causes of death in people using
opioids for non-medical purposes are overdose and trauma.9
Injection drug use (intravenous or intramuscular [IM])
increases the risk of being exposed to HIV, viral hepatitis,
and other infectious agents. As a result of the opioid epidemic,
drug-use associated infections, including infective endocardi-
tis, osteomyelitis, septic arthritis, and epidural abscesses, are
increasing. A statewide study in North Carolina found that
drug-use associated infective endocarditis requiring hospital-
ization and valve surgeries increased more than 12-fold
between 2007 and 2017.10
Scope of Guideline
This Practice Guideline was developed for the treatment
of opioid use disorder and the prevention of opioid overdose-
related deaths. The medications covered in this guideline are
mainly, but not exclusively, those that have been FDA-approved
for the treatment of opioid dependence (DSM-4) or opioid use
disorder (DSM-5).5,6The most recent version, DSM-5, com-
bined the criteria for opioid abuse and opioid dependence, from
prior versions of the DSM, in its new diagnosis of opioid use
disorder. Therefore, pharmacologic treatment may not be
appropriate for all patients along the entire opioid use disorder
continuum. In a study comparing opioid dependence from
DSM-4 and opioid use disorder from DSM-5, optimal concor-
dance occurred when four or more DSM-5 criteria were
endorsed (i.e., the DSM-5 threshold for moderate opioid use
disorder).11Other medications have been used off-label to treat
opioid use disorder (clearly noted in the text); however, the
Guideline Committee has not issued recommendations on the
use of those medications. As a final note, whether FDA-
approved or off-label, cost and/or cost-effectiveness were not
considerations in the development of this Practice Guideline .
Intended Audience
This Practice Guideline is primarily intended for clini-
cians involved in evaluating patients and providing authori-
zation for pharmacological treatments at any level. The
intended audience falls into the broad groups of physicians;
other healthcare providers (especially those with prescribing
authority); medical educators and faculty for other healthcare
professionals in training; and clinical care managers, includ-
ing those offering utilization management services.
Qualifying Statement
This ASAM Practice Guideline is intended to aid
clinicians in their clinical decision-making and patient man-
agement. The Practice Guideline strives to identify and define
clinical decision-making junctures that meet the needs of most
patients inmost circumstances . Clinical decision-making
should involve consideration of the quality and availability
of expertise and services in the community wherein care is
provided. The recommendations in this guideline reflect the
consensus of an independent committee (see Methodology
Section) convened by ASAM between September 2018 and
November 2019, to oversee a focused update of this Practice
Guideline. This Practice Guideline will be updated regularly
as clinical and scientific knowledge advances.Prescribed courses of treatment described in this Prac-
tice Guideline are effective only if the recommendations, as
outlined, are followed. Because lack of patient understanding
and adherence may adversely affect outcomes, clinicians
should make every effort to promote the patient’s understand-
ing of, and adherence to, prescribed and recommended phar-
macological and psychosocial treatments. Patients should be
informed of the risks, benefits, and alternatives to a particular
treatment, and should be an active party to shared decision-
making whenever feasible.
ASAM recognizes that there are challenges to imple-
mentation of these guidelines in certain settings, particularly
in relation to the availability of all FDA approved medications
for the treatment of opioid use disorder and access to psycho-
social treatment in various communities and settings. How-
ever, this guideline aims to set the standard for best clinical
practice, providing recommendations for the appropriate care
of all patients with opioid use disorder in diverse settings. In
circumstances in which the Practice Guideline is being used
as the basis for regulatory or payer decisions, improvement in
quality of care should be the goal. Recommendations in
this Practice Guideline do not supersede any Federal or
state regulation.
Overview of Methodology
This Practice Guideline was developed using the
RAND Corporation (RAND)/University of California, Los
Angeles (UCLA) Appropriateness Method (RAM) a process
that combines scientific evidence and clinical knowledge to
determine the appropriateness of a set of clinical proce-
dures.12The RAM is a deliberate approach encompassing
review of existing guidelines, literature reviews, appropriate-
ness ratings, necessity reviews, and document development.
For this project, ASAM selected an independent committee to
oversee guideline development, to participate in review of
treatment scenarios, and to assist in writing. For the 2015
guideline development process, ASAM’s then Quality
Improvement Council, chaired by Margaret Jarvis, MD, over-
saw the selection process for the independent development
committee, referred to as the Guideline Committee.7
The 2015 Guideline Committee was comprised of 11
experts and researchers from multiple disciplines, medical
specialties, and subspecialties, including academic research,
internal medicine, family medicine, addiction medicine,
addiction psychiatry, general psychiatry, obstetrics/gynecol-
ogy, pharmacology, and clinical neurobiology. Physicians
with both allopathic and osteopathic training were represented
in the Guideline Committee. The 2015 Guideline Committee
was assisted by a technical team of researchers from the
Treatment Research Institute (TRI) affiliated with the Uni-
versity of Pennsylvania and worked under the guidance of Dr.
Kyle Kampman who led the TRI team as Principal Investiga-
tor in implementing the RAM.
2019 Focused Update New
Between September 2018 and November 2019, ASAM
reconvened an independent committee (see Methodology
Section) to oversee a focused update of this Practice Guide-
line.7The purpose of the focused update was to develop newWhite et el. /C15Adopted by the ASAM Board of Directors December 18, 2019
8 /C2232020 American Society of Addiction Medicine
Copyright © 2020 American Society of Addiction Medicine. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.and revised recommendations based on a targeted review of
new evidence, FDA approval of new buprenorphine formu-
lations (see Table 1) and evolving clinical practice guidance.
A full update of the guideline is scheduled to begin in 2021.
ASAM’s Quality Improvement Council worked with a tech-
nical team from RTI International to develop and oversee the
scope of work for the focused update.
The methods used to search the literature and subse-
quently develop guideline statements were consistent with the
RAM methodology employed for the 2015 publication.Criteria for inclusion in the focused update included new
evidence and guidelines that were considered a) clinically
meaningful and applicable to a broad range of clinicians
treating addiction involving opioid use, and b) urgently
needed to ensure the guideline reflects the current state of
the science for the existing recommendations, aligns with
other relevant practice guidelines, and reflects newly
approved medications and formulations. Relevant evidence
and current practices not meeting these criteria will be
reviewed and incorporated into the full update as appropriate.
TABLE 1. Buprenorphine Formulations
Generic Name Route of Administration
DosingBrand Names For the Treatment of Formulation Considerations
Buprenorphine
(monoproduct)Sublingual Tablets
DailyGeneric versions available
similar to Subutex /C6Opioid withdrawal and opioid
use disorderSome risk for diversion or misuse;
Requires daily compliance
Buprenorphine and
naloxoneSublingual tablets and film
DailyGeneric versions available
in addition to Suboxone,
Cassipa, Zubsolv,
BunavailOpioid withdrawal and opioid
use disorderLower potential for misuse and
diversion (compared to
monoproduct); Requires daily
compliance
Buprenorphine
extended-releaseExtended-release Injection
(Monthly)Sublocade Moderate to severe opioid use
disorder in patients who have
initiated treatment with
transmucosal buprenorphine
followed by dose adjustment
for a minimum of 7 daysNo risk for patient diversion or
misuse; Requires patients to
be on a stable dose of
transmucosal buprenorphine
for at least 7 days; Monthly
instead of daily medication
compliance; Less fluctuation
in buprenorphine levels
(compared to daily doses)
Buprenorphine
extended-releaseExtended-release Injection
(Weekly or Monthly)Brixadi Moderate to severe opioid use
disorder in patients who have
initiated treatment with a
single dose of transmucosal
buprenorphine or who are
already being treated with
buprenorphineTentative approval from FDA (not
eligible for marketing in the
U.S. until November 30,
2020). No risk for patient
diversion or misuse; only a
single prior dose of
transmucosal buprenorphine
required prior to initiation;
Weekly or Monthly instead of
daily medication compliance;
Less fluctuation in
buprenorphine levels
(compared to daily doses)
Buprenorphine
hydrochlorideSubcutaneous Implant
(Every 6 months)Probuphine Implant Treatment of opioid use disorder
in patients who have achieved
and sustained prolonged
clinical stability on low-to-
moderate doses of a
transmucosal buprenorphine
(i.e., no more than 8 mg per
day)Requires prolonged stability on
8 mg per day or less
transmucosal buprenorphine;
No risk for patient diversion
or misuse; Healthcare provider
training required for implant
insertion and removal;
Insertion site should be
examined one week after
insertion; Implant must be
removed after 6 months; Risks
associated with improper
insertion and removal;
Currently only FDA
approved for a total treatment
duration of one year
(one insertion per arm); y
Less fluctuation in
buprenorphine levels
(compared to daily doses)
/C3Some patients may experience withdrawal/cravings when switched to a different formulation.
/C6Subutex was discontinued.
yThere is currently no clinical experience with, or research on, insertion of PROBUPHINE beyond a single insertion in each arm or into other sites in the arm. It is important to avoid
previously-implanted sites because the effect of scarring and fibrosis in previously-used insertion sites on either the effectiveness of PROBUPHI NE or the safety of insertion have
not been evaluated. After one insertion in each arm, additional cycles of treatment should only be considered if the potential benefits of continuing PROBUPHINE outweigh the
potential risks of additional insertion and removal procedures. In most cases, patients should be transitioned back to a transmucosal buprenorphin e-containing product for
continued treatment (see https://www.accessdata.fda.gov/drugsatfda_docs/label/2016/204442Orig1s000lbl.pdf).
Table content was derived from FDA labels. Labels and label updates can be accessed at https://www.accessdata.fda.gov/scripts/cder/daf/index.c fm./C15Adopted by the ASAM Board of Directors December 18, 2019 NPG for the Treatment of Opioid Use Disorder
/C2232020 American Society of Addiction Medicine 9
Copyright © 2020 American Society of Addiction Medicine. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.Summary of Recommendations
Part 1: Assessment and Diagnosis of Opioid
Use Disorder
Assessment Recommendations
1. The first clinical priority should be given to identifying
and making appropriate referral for any urgent or emer-
gent medical or psychiatric problem(s), including drug-
related impairment or overdose.
2.
 Comprehensive assessment of the patient is
critical for treatment planning. However, completion of
all assessments should not delay or preclude initiating
pharmacotherapy for opioid use disorder. If not com-
pleted before initiating treatment, assessments should be
completed soon thereafter.
3.
 Completion of the patient’s medi-
cal history should include screening for concomitant
medical conditions, including psychiatric disorders,
infectious diseases (viral hepatitis, HIV, and tuberculosis
[TB]), acute trauma, and pregnancy.
4.
 A physical examination should be
completed as a component of the comprehensive assess-
ment process. The prescriber (the clinician authorizing
the use of a medication for the treatment of opioid use
disorder) should ensure that a current physical examina-
tion is contained within the patient medical record before
(or soon after) a patient is started on pharmacotherapy.
5.
 Initial laboratory testing should
include a complete blood count, liver enzyme tests,
and tests for TB, hepatitis B and C, and HIV. Testing
for sexually transmitted infections should be strongly
considered. Hepatitis A and B vaccinations should be
offered, if appropriate.
6.
 Women of childbearing potential
should be tested for pregnancy, and all women of child-
bearing potential should be queried regarding methods
of contraception.
7.
 Patients being evaluated for opioid
use disorder, and/or for possible medication use in the
treatment of opioid use disorder, should undergo (or have
completed) an assessment of mental health status and
possible psychiatric disorders (such as is outlined in The
ASAM Criteria andThe ASAM Standards ).2,13
8.
 Opioid use disorder is often co-
occurring with other substance use disorders. Evaluation
of a patient with opioid use disorder should include a
detailed history of other past and current substance use
and substance use disorders.
9.
 The use of cannabis, stimulants,
alcohol, and/or other addictive drugs should not be a
reason to withhold or suspend opioid use disorder treat-
ment. However, patients who are actively using substan-
ces during opioid use disorder treatment may require
greater support including a more intensive level of care
(see The ASAM Criteria andThe ASAM Standards ).2,13
10.
 The use of benzodiazepines and
other sedative-hypnotics should not be a reason to with-
hold or suspend treatment with methadone orbuprenorphine. While the combined use of these medi-
cations increases the risk of serious side effects, the harm
caused by untreated opioid use disorder can outweigh
these risks. A risk-benefit analysis should be conducted,
and greater support should be provided including careful
medication management to reduce risks.14
11.
 A nicotine use query should be
completed routinely for all patients and counseling on
cessation of the use of tobacco products and electronic
nicotine delivery devices (e.g. vaping) provided
if indicated.
12.
 As part of comprehensive care the
patient should receive a multidimensional assessment (as
described in The ASAM Criteria ), including an assess-
ment of social and environmental factors to identify
facilitators and barriers to addiction treatment and
long-term recovery (including pharmacotherapy).1
Addiction is a complex biopsychosocial illness, for
which the use of medication(s) is only one component
of comprehensive treatment.
Diagnosis Recommendations
1.
 Other clinicians may diagnose opi-
oid use disorder, but confirmation of the diagnosis must be
obtained by the prescriber before pharmacotherapy for
opioid use disorder commences.
2. Opioid use disorder is primarily diagnosed on the basis of
the history provided by the patient and a comprehensive
assessment that includes a physical examination.
3.
 Validated clinical scales that mea-
sure withdrawal symptoms may be used to assist in the
evaluation of patients with opioid use disorder.
4.
 Drug testing is recommended dur-
ing the comprehensive assessment process, and during
treatment to monitor patients for adherence to prescribed
medications and use of alcohol, illicit, and controlled
substances. The frequency of testing is determined by
several factors including stability of the patient, type of
treatment, and treatment setting. For additional informa-
tion see The ASAM Appropriate Use of Drug Testing in
Clinical Addiction Medicine guidance document.15
Part 2: Treatment Options
1.
 All FDA approved medications for
the treatment of opioid use disorder should be available to
all patients. Clinicians should consider the patient’s
preferences, past treatment history, current state of ill-
ness, and treatment setting when deciding between the
use of methadone, buprenorphine, and naltrexone.
2.
 There is no recommended time limit for
pharmacological treatment.
3.
 Patients’ psychosocial needs
should be assessed, and patients should be offered or
referred to psychosocial treatment based on their indi-
vidual needs. However, a patient’s decision to decline
psychosocial treatment or the absence of available psy-
chosocial treatment should not preclude or delay phar-
macotherapy, with appropriate medication management.
Motivational interviewing or enhancement can be used toWhite et el. /C15Adopted by the ASAM Board of Directors December 18, 2019
10 /C2232020 American Society of Addiction Medicine
Copyright © 2020 American Society of Addiction Medicine. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.encourage patients to engage in psychosocial treatment
services appropriate for addressing individual needs.
4.
 The venue in which treatment is
provided should be carefully considered. Methadone can
only be provided in opioid treatment programs (OTPs) and
acute care settings (under limited circumstances). Bupre-
norphine can be prescribed by waivered clinicians in any
setting, including OTPs and office based opioid treatment
(OBOT) in accordance with the Federal law (21 CFR
§1301.28). Naltrexone can be prescribed in any setting
by any clinician with the authority to prescribe medication.
Clinicians should consider a patient’s psychosocial situa-
tion, co-occurring disorders, and risk of diversion when
determining which treatment setting is most appropriate
(see The ASAM Criteria for additional guidance).1
5.
 Patients with active co-occurring
alcohol use disorder or sedative, hypnotic, or anxiolytic
use disorder (or who are in treatment for a substance use
disorder involving use of alcohol or other sedative drugs,
including benzodiazepines or benzodiazepine receptor
agonists) may need a more intensive level of care than
can be provided in an office-based setting. Persons who
are regularly using alcohol or other sedatives, but do not
meet the criteria for diagnosis of a specific substance use
disorder related to that class of drugs, should be
carefully monitored.
6.
 The prescribing of benzodiaze-
pines or other sedative-hypnotics should be used with
caution in patients who are prescribed methadone or
buprenorphine for the treatment of an opioid use disorder.
While the combined use of these drugs increases the risk
of serious side effects, the harm caused by untreated
opioid use disorder can outweigh these risks. A risk-
benefit analysis should be conducted when deciding
whether to co-prescribe these medications.
7. Methadone is recommended for patients who may benefit
from daily dosing and supervision in an OTP, or for
patients for whom buprenorphine for the treatment of
opioid use disorder has been used unsuccessfully in an
OTP or OBOT setting.
8.
 Opioid dosing guidelines developed for chronic
pain, expressed in morphine milligram equivalents
(MME), are not applicable to medications for the treat-
ment of opioid use disorders.
9.
 Oral naltrexone for the treatment
of opioid use disorder is often adversely affected by poor
medication adherence and should not be used except
under very limited circumstances. Clinicians should
reserve its use for patients who would be able to comply
with special techniques to enhance their adherence, for
example, observed dosing. Extended-release injectable
naltrexone reduces, but does not eliminate, issues with
medication adherence.
10.
 The Prescription Drug Monitoring
Program (PDMP) should be checked regularly for the
purpose of confirming medication adherence and to moni-
tor for the prescribing of other controlled substances.
11.
 Naloxone, for the reversal of opioid overdose,
should be provided to patients being treated for, or with ahistory of, opioid use disorder. Patients and family mem-
bers/significant others should be trained in the use of
naloxone in overdose.
Part 3: Treating Opioid Withdrawal
1.
 Using methadone or buprenorphine
for opioid withdrawal management is recommended over
abrupt cessation of opioids. Abrupt cessation of opioids
may lead to strong cravings, and/or acute withdrawal
syndrome which can put the patient at risk for relapse,
overdose, and overdose death.
2.
 Opioid withdrawal management
(i.e. detoxification) on its own, without ongoing treatment
for opioid use disorder, is not a treatment method for
opioid use disorder and is not recommended. Patients
should be advised about the risk of relapse and other
safety concerns, including increased risk of overdose
and overdose death. Ongoing maintenance medication,
in combination with psychosocial treatment appropriate
for the patient’s needs, is the standard of care for treating
opioid use disorder.
3.
 Assessment of a patient undergoing
opioid withdrawal management should include a thorough
medical history and physical examination, focusing on
signs and symptoms associated with opioid withdrawal.
4.
 By regulation, opioid withdrawal
management with methadone must be done in an OTP or
an acute care setting (under limited circumstances). For
patients withdrawing from short acting opioids the initial
dose should typically be 20-30 mg per day and the patient
may be tapered off in approximately 6-10 days.
5.
 Opioid withdrawal management
with buprenorphine should not be initiated until there
are objective signs of opioid withdrawal. (See Part 3 for
more information on the timing of initiating buprenor-
phine.) Once signs of withdrawal have been objectively
confirmed, a dose of buprenorphine sufficient to suppress
withdrawal symptoms is given (an initial dose of 2-4 mg
titrated up as needed to suppress withdrawal symptoms).
6.
 Alpha-2 adrenergic agonists (e.g.,
FDA-approved lofexidine and off-label clonidine) are safe
and effective for management of opioid withdrawal. How-
ever, methadone and buprenorphine are more effective in
reducing the symptoms of opioid withdrawal, in retaining
patients in withdrawal management, and in supporting the
completion of withdrawal management.
7. Opioid withdrawal management using ultra-rapid opioid
detoxification (UROD) is not recommended due to high
risk for adverse events or death. Naltrexone-facilitated
opioid withdrawal management can be safe and effective
but should be used only by clinicians experienced with this
clinical method, and in cases in which anesthesia or
conscious sedation are not employed.
Part 4: Methadone
1.
 Methadone is a recommended
treatment for patients with opioid use disorder, who
are able to give informed consent and have no specific
contraindication for this treatment./C15Adopted by the ASAM Board of Directors December 18, 2019 NPG for the Treatment of Opioid Use Disorder
/C2232020 American Society of Addiction Medicine 11
Copyright © 2020 American Society of Addiction Medicine. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.2.
 The recommended initial dose of
methadone ranges from 10 to 30 mg, with reassessment
as clinically indicated (typically in 2 to 4 hours). Use a
lower-than-usual initial dose (2.5 to 10 mg) in individuals
with no or low opioid tolerance.
3.
 Following initial withdrawal stabi-
lization, the usual daily dose of methadone ranges from 60
to 120 mg. Some patients may respond to lower doses and
some may need higher doses. Methadone titration should
be individualized based on careful assessment of the
patient’s response and generally should not be increased
every day. Typically, methadone can be increased by no
more than 10 mg approximately every 5 days based on the
patient’s symptoms of opioid withdrawal or sedation.
4. The administration of methadone should be monitored
because unsupervised administration can lead to misuse
and diversion. OTP regulations require monitored medi-
cation administration until the patient’s clinical response
and behavior demonstrates that prescribing non-moni-
tored doses is appropriate.
5.
 Patients’ psychosocial needs
should be assessed, and patients should be offered or
referred to psychosocial treatment based on their indi-
vidual needs, in conjunction with methadone in the
treatment of opioid use disorder. However, a patient’s
decision to decline psychosocial treatment or the absence
of available psychosocial treatment should not preclude
or delay treatment with methadone, with appropriate
medication management. Motivational interviewing or
enhancement can be used to encourage patients to engage
in psychosocial treatment services appropriate for
addressing their individual needs.
6.
 For patients who previously
received methadone for the treatment of opioid use
disorder, methadone should be reinstituted immediately
if relapse occurs or if an assessment determines that the
risk of relapse is high (unless contraindicated). Re-initi-
ation of methadone should follow the recommendations
above regarding initial dose and titration.
7.
 Strategies directed at relapse pre-
vention are an important part of addiction treatment and
should be included in any plan of care for a patient
receiving opioid use disorder treatment or ongoing mon-
itoring of the status of their disorder.
8.
 Transitioning from methadone to
another medication for the treatment of opioid use disorder
may be appropriate if the patient experiences dangerous or
intolerable side effects or is not successful in attaining or
maintaining treatment goals through the use of methadone.
9.
 Patients transitioning from metha-
done to buprenorphine in the treatment of opioid use
disorder should ideally be on low doses of methadone
before making the transition. Patients on low doses of
methadone (30–40 mg per day or less) generally tolerate
transition to buprenorphine with minimal discomfort,
whereas patients on higher doses of methadone may expe-
rience significant discomfort in transitioning medications.
10.
 Patients transitioning from meth-
adone to naltrexone must be completely withdrawn frommethadone and other opioids, before they can receive
naltrexone. The only exception would apply when an
experienced clinician receives consent from the patient to
embark on a plan of naltrexone-facilitated opioid
withdrawal management.
11.
 There is no recommended time
limit for pharmacological treatment with methadone.
Patients who discontinue methadone treatment should
be made aware of the risks associated with opioid over-
dose, and especially the increased risk of overdose death if
they return to illicit opioid use. Treatment alternatives
including buprenorphine (see Part 5) and naltrexone (see
Part 6), as well as opioid overdose prevention with nalox-
one (see part 13), should be discussed with any patient
choosing to discontinue treatment.
Part 5: Buprenorphine
1.
 Buprenorphine is a recommended treatment for
patients with opioid use disorder, who are able to give
informed consent and have no specific contraindication
for this treatment.
2.
 For patients who are currently
opioid dependent, buprenorphine should not be initiated
until there are objective signs of opioid withdrawal to
reduce the risk of precipitated withdrawal. (See discus-
sion).
3.
 Once objective signs of with-
drawal are observed, initiation of buprenorphine should
start with a dose of 2–4 mg. Dosages may be increased in
increments of 2–8 mg.
4.
 The setting for initiation of bupre-
norphine should be carefully considered. Both office-based
and home-based initiation are considered safe and effective
when starting buprenorphine treatment. Clinical judgement
should be used to determine the most appropriate setting for
a given patient and may include consideration of the
patient’s past experience with buprenorphine and assess-
ment of their ability to manage initiation at home.
5.
 Following initiation, buprenor-
phine dose should be titrated to alleviate symptoms.
To be effective, buprenorphine dose should be sufficient
to enable patients to discontinue illicit opioid use. Evi-
dence suggests that 16 mg per day or more may be more
effective than lower doses. There is limited evidence
regarding the relative efficacy of doses higher than 24 mg
per day, and the use of higher doses may increase the risk
of diversion.16
6.
 The FDA recently approved several new bupre-
norphine formulations for treatment of opioid use disor-
der (see Table 1). As data regarding the effectiveness of
these products are currently limited, clinicians should use
these products as indicated and be mindful of emerging
evidence as it becomes available.
7.
 Patients’ psychosocial needs
should be assessed, and patients should be offered or
referred to psychosocial treatment based on their indi-
vidual needs, in conjunction with buprenorphine in the
treatment of opioid use disorder. However, a patient’s
decision to decline psychosocial treatment or the absenceWhite et el. /C15Adopted by the ASAM Board of Directors December 18, 2019
12 /C2232020 American Society of Addiction Medicine
Copyright © 2020 American Society of Addiction Medicine. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.of available psychosocial treatment should not preclude
or delay buprenorphine treatment, with appropriate med-
ication management. Motivational interviewing or
enhancement can be used to encourage patients to engage
in psychosocial treatment services appropriate for
addressing their individual needs.
8.
 Clinicians should take steps to
reduce the chance of buprenorphine diversion. Recom-
mended strategies may include frequent office visits (e.g.,
weekly in early treatment); drug testing, including testing
for buprenorphine and metabolites; and recall visits for
medication counts. Refer to ASAM’s Sample Diversion
Control Policy for additional strategies to reduce the risk
for diversion .16
9.
 Drug testing should be used to
monitor patients for adherence to buprenorphine and
use of illicit and controlled substances. For additional
guidance see The ASAM Appropriate Use of Drug Testing
in Clinical Addiction Medicine .14
10.
 Patients should be seen frequently
at the beginning of treatment until they are determined to
be stable.
11. When considering a transition from buprenorphine to nal-
trexone, providers should note that 7–14 days should
typically elapse between the last dose of buprenorphine
and the start of naltrexone to ensure that the patient is not
physically dependent on opioids before starting naltrexone.
12.
 When considering a transition
from buprenorphine to methadone, there is no required
time delay because the transition to a full mu-opioid
agonist from a partial agonist does not typically result in
an adverse reaction.
13.
 There is no recommended time
limit for pharmacological treatment with buprenorphine.
Patients who discontinue buprenorphine treatment
should be made aware of the risks associated with opioid
overdose, and especially the increased risk of death if
they return to illicit opioid use. Treatment alternatives
including methadone (see Part 4) and naltrexone (see Part
6), as well as opioid overdose prevention with naloxone
(see part 13) should be discussed with any patient choos-
ing to discontinue treatment.
14.
 Buprenorphine taper and discon-
tinuation is a slow process and close monitoring is
recommended. Buprenorphine tapering is generally
accomplished over several months. Patients should be
encouraged to remain in treatment for ongoing monitor-
ing past the point of discontinuation.
Part 6: Naltrexone
1.
 Extended-release injectable nal-
trexone is a recommended treatment for preventing relapse
to opioid use disorder in patients who are no longer
physically dependent on opioids, able to give informed
consent, and have no contraindications for this treatment.
2.
 Extended-release injectable nal-
trexone should generally be administered every 4 weeks
by deep IM injection in the gluteal muscle at the set dosage
of 380 mg per injection. Some patients, including thosewho metabolize naltrexone more rapidly, may benefit from
dosing as frequently as every 3 weeks.
3.
 Oral naltrexone is not recom-
mended except under limited circumstances (see Part 6
for more details).
4.
 Patients’ psychosocial needs should
be assessed, and patients should be offered or referred to
psychosocial treatment based on their individual needs, in
conjunction with extended-release naltrexone. A patient’s
decision to decline psychosocial treatment or the absence of
available psychosocial treatment should not preclude or delay
naltrexone treatment, with appropriate medication manage-
ment. Motivational interviewing or enhancement can be used
to encourage patients to engage in psychosocial treatment
services appropriate for addressing their individual needs.
5.
 There is no recommended length of
treatment with naltrexone. Du ration depends on clinical
judgment and the patient’s individual circumstances. Because
there is no physical dependence a ssociated with naltrexone, it
can be stopped abruptly without withdrawal symptoms.
6.
 Transitioning from naltrexone to
methadone or buprenorphine should be planned, consid-
ered, and monitored. Transitioning from an antagonist such
as naltrexone to a full agonist (methadone) or a partial
agonist (buprenorphine) is generally less complicated than
transitioning from a full or partial agonist to an antagonist
because there is no physical dependence associated with
antagonist treatment and thus no possibility of precipitated
withdrawal. Patients being transitioned from naltrexone to
buprenorphine or methadone will not have physical depen-
dence on opioids and thus the initial doses of methadone or
buprenorphine should be low. Patients should not be tran-
sitioned until a significant amount of the naltrexone is no
longer in their system, about 1 day for oral naltrexone or
28 days for extended-release injectable naltrexone.
7.
 Patients who discontinue naltrexone
treatment should be made aware of the increased risks
associated with opioid overdose, and especially the increased
risk of overdose death, if they return to illicit opioid use.
Treatment alternatives including methadone (see Part 4) and
buprenorphine (see Part 5), as well as overdose prevention
with naloxone (see part 13) should be discussed with any
patient choosing to discontinue treatment.
Part 7: Psychosocial Treatment in Conjunction
with Medications for the Treatment of Opioid
Use Disorder
1.
 Patients’ psychosocial needs should
be assessed, and patients should be offered or referred to
psychosocial treatment, based on their individual needs, in
conjunction with any pharmacotherapy for the treatment
of, or prevention of relapse to, opioid use disorder. How-
ever, a patient’s decision to decline psychosocial treatment
or the absence of available psychosocial treatment should
not preclude or delay pharmacological treatment of opioid
use disorder, with appropriate medication management.
Motivational interviewing or enhancement can be used to
encourage patients to engage in psychosocial treatment
services appropriate for addressing their individual needs./C15Adopted by the ASAM Board of Directors December 18, 2019 NPG for the Treatment of Opioid Use Disorder
/C2232020 American Society of Addiction Medicine 13
Copyright © 2020 American Society of Addiction Medicine. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.2. Treatment planning should include collaboration with
qualified behavioral healthcare providers to determine
the optimal type and intensity of psychosocial treatment
and for renegotiation of the treatment plan for circum-
stances in which patients do not adhere to recommended
plans for, or referrals to, psychosocial treatment.
Part 8: Special Populations: Pregnant Women
1.
 The first priority in evaluating pregnant women
for opioid use disorder should be to identify emergent or
urgent medical conditions that require immediate referral
for clinical evaluation.
2.
 Treatment with methadone or
buprenorphine is recommended and should be initiated
as early as possible during pregnancy.
3.
 Pregnant women who are physi-
cally dependent on opioids should receive treatment
using methadone or buprenorphine rather than with-
drawal management or psychosocial treatment alone.
4.
 A medical examination and psy-
chosocial assessment are recommended when evaluating
pregnant women for opioid use disorder. However, com-
pletion of all assessments should not delay or preclude
initiating pharmacotherapy for opioid use disorder. If not
completed before initiating treatment, assessments
should be completed as soon as possible thereafter.
5. Obstetricians and gynecologists, and other healthcare
providers that care for pregnant women, should be alert
to signs and symptoms of opioid use disorder. Pregnant
women with opioid use disorder are more likely to seek
prenatal care late in pregnancy, miss appointments, expe-
rience poor weight gain, or exhibit signs of withdrawal
or intoxication.
6.
 The psychosocial needs of preg-
nant women being treated for opioid use disorder should be
assessed and patients should be offered or referred to
psychosocial treatment based on their individual needs.
A woman’s decision to decline psychosocial treatment or
the absence of available psychosocial treatment should not
preclude or delay pharmacological treatment, with appro-
priate medication management, during pregnancy. Moti-
vational interviewing or enhancement can be used to
encourage patients to engage in psychosocial treatment
services appropriate for addressing their individual needs.
7. Counseling and testing for HIV should be provided (in
accordance with state law). Tests for hepatitis B and C
and liver enzymes are also suggested. Hepatitis A and B
vaccinations is recommended for those whose hepatitis
serology is negative.
8.
 Drug and alcohol testing should be
used to monitor patients for adherence to medication and
for use of illicit and controlled substances. This should be
done with informed consent from the mother, realizing
that there may be adverse legal and social consequences
for substance use. State laws differ on reporting sub-
stance use during pregnancy. Laws that penalize women
for substance use and for obtaining treatment serve to
prevent women from obtaining prenatal care and worsen
outcomes. For further clarity see The ASAM AppropriateUse of Drug Testing in Clinical Addiction Medicine
guidance document.14
9.
 Care for pregnant women with
opioid use disorder should be comanaged by a clinician
experienced in obstetrical care and a clinician experi-
enced in the treatment of opioid use disorder.
10. Hospitalization during initiation of methadone or bupre-
norphine may be advisable due to the potential for
adverse events, especially in the third trimester.
11.
 Methadone should be initiated at a
dose range of 10–30 mg. Incremental doses of 5–10 mg
is recommended every 3–6 hours, as needed, to treat
withdrawal symptoms, to a maximum fist day dose of 30-
40 mg.
12.
 After initiation, clinicians should
increase the methadone dose by no more than 10 mg
approximately every 5 days. The goal is to maintain the
lowest dose that controls withdrawal symptoms and
minimizes the desire to use additional opioids.
13.
 Clinicians should be aware that
the pharmacokinetics of methadone are affected by preg-
nancy. With advancing gestational age, plasma levels of
methadone progressively decrease and clearance
increases. Increased and/or split doses may be needed
as pregnancy progresses. Twice-daily dosing is more
effective and has fewer side effects than single dosing
but may not be practical because methadone is typically
dispensed in an OTP. After childbirth, doses may need to
be adjusted (typically reduced) based on changes in
weight and metabolism.
14.
 If a woman becomes pregnant
while she is receiving naltrexone, it may be appropriate
to discontinue the medication if the patient and clinician
agree that the risk of relapse is low. A decision to remain
on naltrexone during pregnancy should be carefully
considered by the patient and her clinician and should
include a discussion on the insufficiency of research on
risks (if any) of continued use of naltrexone. If the patient
chooses to discontinue treatment with naltrexone and is at
risk for relapse, treatment with methadone or buprenor-
phine should be considered.
15.
 Use of naloxone challenge (see
glossary) to test for opioid dependence and risk of
precipitated withdrawal is not recommended for pregnant
women with opioid use disorder.
16.
 Unless otherwise contraindicated
(see Part 8), mothers receiving methadone or buprenor-
phine for treatment of opioid use disorders should be
encouraged to breastfeed.
Part 9: Special Populations: Individuals with
Pain
1.
 For all patients with pain, it is
important that the correct diagnosis is made and that
pain is addressed. Alternative treatments including non-
opioid medications with pain modulating properties,
behavioral approaches, physical therapy, and procedural
approaches (e.g., regional anesthesia) should be consid-
ered before prescribing opioid medications for pain.White et el. /C15Adopted by the ASAM Board of Directors December 18, 2019
14 /C2232020 American Society of Addiction Medicine
Copyright © 2020 American Society of Addiction Medicine. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.2.
 If pharmacological treatment is
considered, non-opioid analgesics, such as acetamino-
phen and NSAIDs, and non-opioid medications with pain
modulating properties should be tried first.
3.
 For patients with pain who have an
active opioid use disorder but are not in treatment,
methadone or buprenorphine should be considered.
The patient’s opioid use disorder and pain should be
stabilized and managed concurrently.
4.
 For patients taking methadone or
buprenorphine for the treatment of opioid use disorder,
temporarily increasing the dose or dosing frequency (i.e.
split dosing to maximize the analgesic properties of these
medications) may be effective for managing pain. (Titra-
tion of methadone should follow the guidance in Part 4 of
this guideline)
5.
 For patients taking methadone for
the treatment of opioid use disorder who have acute pain
refractory to other treatments and require additional
opioid-based analgesia, adding a short acting full agonist
opioid to their regular dose of methadone can be consid-
ered to manage moderate to severe acute pain. The dose
of additional full agonist opioid analgesic prescribed is
anticipated to be higher than the typical dose necessary to
achieve adequate analgesia in opioid-naı ¨ve individuals.
6.
 Patients receiving buprenorphine for opioid use
disorder who have moderate to severe acute pain refrac-
tory to other treatments and require additional opioid-
based analgesia may benefit from the addition of as-
needed doses of buprenorphine.
7.
 The addition of a short-acting full
agonist opioid to the patient’s regular dose of buprenor-
phine can be effective for the management of severe acute
pain in supervised settings, such as during hospitaliza-
tion. The dose of additional full agonist opioid analgesic
prescribed is anticipated to be higher than the typical
dose necessary to achieve adequate analgesia in opioid-
naı¨ve individuals. Because of a lack of evidence, the
committee was unable to come to consensus on whether
this adjunct treatment can be safely prescribed in ambu-
latory care settings.
8.
 Discontinuation of methadone or
buprenorphine before surgery is not required. Higher-
potency intravenous full agonists opioids can be used
perioperatively for analgesia.
9.
 Decisions related to discontinuing
or adjusting the dose of buprenorphine prior to a planned
surgery should be made on an individual basis, through
consultation between the surgical and anesthesia teams
and the addiction treatment provider when possible.
10.
 If it is decided that buprenorphine
or methadone should be discontinued before a planned
surgery, this may occur the day before or the day of surgery,
based on surgical and anesthesia team recommendations.
Higher-potency intravenous full agonists opioids can be
used perioperatively for analgesia. Methadone or bupre-
norphine can be resumed post-operatively when the need
for full opioid agonist analgesia has resolved, with addi-
tional considerations for post-operative pain managementas described for acute pain above. The initial dose and
titration should typically be determined by the prescriber.
In general, pre-surgery daily doses of these medications
can be resumed if they werewithheld for less than 2-3 days.
11.
 Patients on naltrexone may not
respond to opioid analgesics in the usual manner. There-
fore, it is recommended that mild pain be treated with
non-opioid analgesics, and moderate to severe pain be
treated with higher potency NSAIDs (e.g. ketorolac) on a
short-term basis.
12.
 Oral naltrexone should be discon-
tinued 72 hours before surgery and extended-release
injectable naltrexone should be discontinued 30 days
before an anticipated surgery. (Reinitiation of naltrexone
should follow the guidance in Part 6 of this guideline)
13.
 Naltrexone’s blockade of the mu opioid receptor
can often be overcome when necessary with high potency full
agonist opioids. In these instances, patients should be closely
m o n i t o r e di na ne m e r g e n c yd e partment or hospital setting.
Part 10: Special Populations: Adolescents
1. Clinicians should consider treating adolescents who have
opioid use disorder using the full range of treatment
options, including pharmacotherapy.
2.
 Opioid agonists (methadone and
buprenorphine) and antagonists (naltrexone) may be con-
sidered for treatment of opioid use disorder in adolescents.
Federal laws and FDA approvals should be considered when
recommending pharmacotherapy for adolescent patients.
3.
 Psychosocial treatment is recom-
mended in the treatment of adolescents with opioid use
disorder. The risk benefit balance of pharmacological
treatment without concurrent psychosocial treatment
should be carefully considered and discussed with the
patient and her or his parent or guardian as appropriate.
A patient’s decision to decline psychosocial treatment or
the absence of available psychosocial treatment should not
preclude or delay pharmacological treatment of opioid use
disorder, with appropriate medication management. Moti-
vational interviewing or enhancement can be used to
encourage patients to engage in psychosocial treatment
services appropriate for addressing their individual needs.
4.
 Concurrent practices to reduce
infection (e.g., risk behavior reduction interventions) are
recommended as components of comprehensive treatment
for the prevention of blood-borne viruses (infections related
to injection practices) and sexually transmitted infections.
5. Adolescents may benefit from treatment in specialized
treatment programs that provide multidimensional ser-
vices (See The ASAM Criteria guidelines).2
Part 11: Special Populations: Individuals with
Co-occurring Psychiatric Disorders
1.
 A comprehensive assessment includ-
ing determination of mental health status and suicide
risk should be used to evaluate whether the patient is stable.
Patients with suicidal or homicidal ideation should
be referred immediately for treatment and possibly hospitali-
zation./C15Adopted by the ASAM Board of Directors December 18, 2019 NPG for the Treatment of Opioid Use Disorder
/C2232020 American Society of Addiction Medicine 15
Copyright © 2020 American Society of Addiction Medicine. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.2. Management of patients at risk for suicide should
include reducing immediate risk, managing underlying
factors associated with suicidal intent, and monitoring
and follow-up.
3.
 All patients with psychiatric
disorders should be asked about suicidal ideation and
behavior. Patients with a history of suicidal ideation or
attempts should have adherence for opioid use disorder
and psychiatric disorder medications monitored more
closely.
4.
 Assessment for psychiatric disorder
should occur at the onset of agonist or antagonist treat-
ment. However, completion of all assessments should not
delay or preclude initiating pharmacotherapy for opioid
use disorder. If not completed before initiating treatment,
assessments should be completed as soon as possible
thereafter. Reassessment using a detailed mental status
examination should occur after stabilization with metha-
done, buprenorphine, or naltrexone.
5.
 Pharmacotherapy in conjunction
with psychosocial treatment should be offered to patients
with opioid use disorder and a co-occurring psychiatric
disorder. A patient’s decision to decline psychosocial
treatment or the absence of available psychosocial treat-
ment should not preclude or delay pharmacological treat-
ment of opioid use disorder, with appropriate mediation
management. Motivational interviewing or enhancement
can be used to encourage patients to engage in psychoso-
cial treatment services appropriate for addressing their
individual needs.
6. Clinicians should be aware of potential interactions
between medications used to treat co-occurring psychiat-
ric conditions and opioid use disorder.
7. Assertive community treatment should be considered for
patients with co-occurring schizophrenia and opioid use
disorder who have a recent history of, or are at risk of,
repeated hospitalization or homelessness.
Part 12: Special Populations: Individuals in the
Criminal Justice System
1.
 All FDA approved medications for the treatment
of opioid use disorder should be available to individuals
receiving healthcare within the criminal justice system.
The treatment plan, including choice of medication,
should be based on the patient’s individual clinical needs.
2.
 Continuation of treatment after
release results in a substantial reduction in all-cause and
overdose mortality. Treatment should be individualized,
and patients should receive complete information to make
informed decisions in consultation with a medical and
treatment team.
3.
 Individuals entering the c riminal justice system
should not be subject to forced opioid withdrawal.
Patients being treated for opioid use disorder at the time
of entrance into the criminal justice system should con-
tinue their treatment. Patients with opioid use disorder
who are not in treatment should be assessed and offered
individualized pharmacotherapy and psychosocial treat-
ment as appropriate.4.
 Initiation or maintenance of phar-
macotherapy for the treatment of opioid use disorder is
recommended for individuals within the criminal justice
system (including both jails and prisons). Criminal justice
staff should coordinate care and access to pharmacother-
apy to avoid interruption in treatment. Patients should not
be forced to transition from agonist (methadone or bupre-
norphine) to antagonist (naltrexone) treatment.
5.
 Individuals in the criminal justice
system who have opioid use disorder or who are experienc-
ing opioid withdrawal should be offered a combination of
pharmacotherapy and psychosocial treatment (based on an
assessment of their individual psychosocial needs). A
patient’s decision to decline psychosocial treatment or
the absence of available psychosocial treatment should
not preclude or delay pharmacological treatment of opioid
use disorder, with appropriate medication management.
Motivational interviewing or enhancement can be used to
encourage patients to engage in psychosocial treatment
services appropriate for addressing their individual needs.
6.
 If an OTP is not accessible, providers may need to
transition individuals from methadone to buprenorphine.
Effectively transitioning from methadone to buprenor-
phine can be challenging but can be achieved safely if
managed by a provider experienced in the procedure.
7.
 Risk for relapse and overdose is
particularly high in the weeks immediately following
release from prison and jails. Patients being treated for
opioid use disorder while in prison or jail should be
stabilized on pharmacotherapy (methadone, buprenor-
phine or naltrexone) and continue in treatment after their
release. Patient care on reentry to the community should be
individualized and coordinated with treatment providers in
the community.
8.
 Naloxone kits should be available within correc-
tional facilities. Individuals with opioid use disorder
should receive a naloxone kit prior to release, and indi-
viduals and families should be educated in how to
administer naloxone.
Part 13: Naloxone for the Treatment of Opioid
Overdose
1.
 Naloxone should be administered in
the event of a suspected opioid overdose.
2.
 Naloxone may be administered to
pregnant women in cases of overdose to save the mother’s
life.
3.
 Patients who are being treated for
opioid use disorder (as well as people with a history of
opioid use disorder leaving incarceration) and their family
members/significant others should be given naloxone kits
or prescriptions for naloxone. Patients and family mem-
bers/significant others should be trained in the use of
naloxone in overdose.
4. The Guideline Committee, based on consensus opinion,
recommends that first responders such as emergency
medical services personnel, police officers, and fire-
fighters be trained in and authorized to carry and
administer naloxone.White et el. /C15Adopted by the ASAM Board of Directors December 18, 2019
16 /C2232020 American Society of Addiction Medicine
Copyright © 2020 American Society of Addiction Medicine. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.INTRODUCTION
Purpose
The American Society of Addiction Medicine (ASAM)
developed the National Practice Guideline for the Treatment of
Opioid Use Disorder (the Practice Guideline ) to provide
information on evidence-based treatment of opioid use disor-
der. This guideline is intended to assist clinicians in the deci-
sion-making process for prescribing pharmacotherapies and
psychosocial treatments to patients with opioid use disorder.
Specifically, the Practice Guideline :
/C15Identifies current practices and outstanding questions
regarding the safe and effective use of medications for
the treatment of opioid use disorder.
/C15Uses a methodology that integrates evidence-based prac-
tices and expert clinical judgment to develop recommen-
dations on best practices in opioid use disorder treatment.
/C15Presents best practices in a cohesive document for clini-
cians’ use to improve the effectiveness of opioid use
disorder treatment.
Background on Opioid Use Disorder
Opioid use disorder is a brain disorder that can range in
severity from mild to severe. Diagnosis of this disorder is based
on a checklist of symptoms defined in the Diagnostic and
Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, 5th Edition (DSM-5)
developed by the American Psychiatric Association.5
ASAM defines addiction as ‘‘a treatable, chronic medi-
cal disease involving complex interactions among brain cir-
cuits, genetics, the environment, and an individual’s life
experiences. People with addiction use substances or engage
in behaviors that become compulsive and often continue
despite harmful consequences.’’ Addiction is a serious biopsy-
chosocial illness, meaning that biological, psychological, and
social factors can all contribute to both the development of,
and recovery from, this disease. The ASAM Criteria (dis-
cussed in Part 1) provide a framework for assessing how
diverse biopsychosocial factors contribute to an individual
patient’s addiction and the type and intensity of treatment
needed to support their recovery. ASAM views addiction as
fundamentally a neurological disease involving brain reward,
motivation, memory, and related circuitry, and recognizes that
there are unifying features in all cases of addiction, including
substance-related addiction and nonsubstance-related addic-
tion. In this context, the preferred term by ASAM for this
disorder is addiction involving opioid use .
A variety of substances commonly associated with
addiction work on specific receptors and neurotransmitter
systems in the nervous system. Pharmacological agents used
in the treatment of addiction exert their effects via actions on
specific receptors. Hence, the medications used in the treat-
ment of addiction have efficacy based on their own molecular
structure and the particular neurotransmitter receptors
affected by that medication. Medications developed for the
treatment of addiction involving opioid use may have benefits
in the treatment of addiction involving an individual’s use of
other substances. For instance, naltrexone, which is approved
by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) for thetreatment of opioid dependence (using DSM, 4th Edition
[DSM-4] terminology), is also FDA-approved for the treat-
ment of alcohol dependence (DSM-4).6
ASAM encourages clinicians, researchers, educators,
and policy makers to use the term ‘‘addiction involving __’’
regardless of whether the patient’s condition at a given point in
its natural history seems to more prominently involve opioid
use, alcohol use, nicotine use, or engagement in addictive
behaviors such as gambling. However, given the widespread
North American application of the DSM’s categorization of
disorders, this Practice Guideline will, for the sake of brevity
and convention, use the term opioid use disorder.
Epidemiology
In 2018, an estimated 10.3 million people in the United
States misused opioids (representing 3.7% of the population
aged 12 or older), including 9.9 million pain reliever misusers
and 808,000 heroin users. The 2018 National Survey of Drug
Use and Health (NSDUH) found that 2.0 million persons in
America met DSM 5 criteria for opioid use disorder.8Impor-
tantly, nonmedical use of prescription opioids has been shown
to be associated with the initiation of heroin use. In a study
pooling data from the NSDUH from 2002 to 2012, the
incidence of heroin use was 19 times greater among individ-
uals who reported prior nonmedical use of prescription
opioids compared to individuals who did not report prior
nonmedical prescription opioid use.17
Mortality and Morbidity
Opioid misuse is associated with increased mortality. In
the United States, more than 70,200 people died from drug
overdoses in 2017; 47,600 of these deaths involved opioids.18
These deaths include overdose from both illicit and prescrip-
tion drugs. The sharpest increase occurred for deaths related
to fentanyl and fentanyl analogs (other synthetic narcotics)
which accounted for 28,400 overdose deaths in 2017. Drug
overdose deaths involving heroin rose from 1,960 in 1999 to
15,482 in 2017, and drug overdose deaths from prescription
opioids rose from 3,442 in 1999 to 17,029 in 2017.18
Risky behaviors associated with opioid misuse increase
the risk of exposure to HIV , viral hepatitis, and other infectious
agents through contact with infected blood or body fluids (e.g.,
semen) that results from sharing syringes and injection para-
phernalia, or through unprotected sexual contact.9Nearly one
in 10 new HIV diagnoses occur among people who inject
drugs.19Importantly, injection drug use (IDU) is the highest-
risk behavior for acquiring hepatitis C virus. More than 41,000
Americans were newly diagnosed with acute hepatitis C in
2016 with most new infections driven by IDU.20
Estimates of the total United States economic burden
resulting from the opioid crisis vary widely. One estimate
suggested an economic cost of $78.5 billion per year and
included costs related to health care, lost productivity, addic-
tion treatment, and criminal justice involvement.21–23
Another estimate, from the Council of Economic Advisors,
found an economic cost of $696 billion in 2018 alone
including the value of lost lives, as well as increases in
healthcare and substance abuse treatment costs, increases
in criminal justice costs, and reductions in productivity.23/C15Adopted by the ASAM Board of Directors December 18, 2019 NPG for the Treatment of Opioid Use Disorder
/C2232020 American Society of Addiction Medicine 17
Copyright © 2020 American Society of Addiction Medicine. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.Scope of Guideline
This Practice Guideline was developed to assist clini-
cians in the evaluation and treatment of opioid use disorder.
Although there are existing guidelines for the treatment of
opioid use disorder, multiple new formulations of medications
used for its treatment have been approved over the last few
years. Moreover, few of the existing guidelines address the
needs of special populations such as pregnant women, indi-
viduals with co-occurring psychiatric disorders, individuals
with pain, adolescents, or individuals involved in the criminal
justice system.
Overall, the Practice Guideline contains recommenda-
tions for the evaluation and treatment of opioid use disorder,
opioid withdrawal management, psychosocial treatment, spe-
cial populations, and opioid overdose.
/C15Part 1: Contains guidelines on the evaluation of opioid
use disorder
/C15Part 2: Provides recommendations regarding treatment
options
/C15Part 3: Describes the management of opioid withdrawal
/C15Parts 4 –6:Provide guidelines on medications for treating
opioid use disorder
/C15Part 7: Describes psychosocial treatment used in conjunc-
tion with medications
/C15Parts 8 –12:Provide guidelines for treating special pop-
ulations and circumstances
/C15Part 13: Describes the use of naloxone in treating
opioid overdose
Included and Excluded Medications
The medications covered in this guideline include the
following:
1. Methadone (part 4)
2. Buprenorphine (part 5)
3. Naltrexone (part 6)
4. Naloxone (part 13)
5. Clonidine (part 3)
6. Lofexidine (part 3)
Methadone, buprenorphine, naltrexone, and naloxone
all act directly upon opioid receptors, particularly the mu-
subtype. Methadone is a mu-receptor agonist; buprenorphine
is a partial mu-receptor agonist; and naltrexone is an antago-
nist. Buprenorphine and naltrexone are also kappa opioid
receptor antagonists which may contribute to their therapeutic
effects.24,25Naloxone is a fast-acting antagonist used to
reverse opioid overdose, a condition that may be life-threat-
ening. Because of the differing actions of these medications at
the receptor level, they can have very different clinical effects
during treatment.
Clonidine and lofexidine for the management of
opioid withdrawal are described in Part 3: Treating
Opioid Withdrawal of this Practice Guideline. Lofexidine
has been used for the management of opioid withdrawal
for many years and was approved for this indication by
the FDA in May 2018. Clonidine is not FDA-approved
for opioid withdrawal syndrome in the United States buthas been in use, off label, in clinical settings for over
25 years.
ASAM recognizes that withdrawal management and
withdrawal management medications could be potential
topics for future comprehensive guideline development.
ASAM will regularly review its published guidelines to
determine when partial or full updates are needed (see
2019 Focused Update section below). The emergence of
newly approved medications, medical devices and new
research will be considered as part of this process. Since first
publication of this guideline, ASAM developed a consensus
document that addresses topics discussed in this Practice
Guideline (The ASAM Appropriate Use of Drug Testing in
Clinical Addiction Medicine).26For this, and any new ASAM
guidelines published before a full update to this Practice
Guideline , it is to be assumed that the recommendations in the
latter documents will take precedence until this Practice
Guideline is updated.
Intended Audience
This Practice Guideline is intended for all clinicians, at
any level, involved in evaluating for, and/or providing, opioid
use disorder treatment in the United States. The intended
audience falls into the following broad groups:
1. Clinicians, including physicians, nurse practitioners
(NPs), physician assistants (PA), clinical nurse specialists,
certified registered nurse anesthetists, and certified nurse
midwives involved in the assessment, diagnosis, and treat-
ment of opioid use disorder. General practice clinicians
(including those providing primary care, family practice,
pediatric, obstetric, gynecologic, emergency, and urgent
care services) are often first-line providers of medical care
related to opioid use disorder and are also a key audience
for the guideline.
2. Clinicians involved with the completion of health assess-
ments and delivery of health services to special popula-
tions.
3. Clinicians involved in making an initial assessment and
offering psychosocial treatments in conjunction with med-
ications to treat opioid use disorder.
4. Clinical case managers responsible for clinical
care support, coordinating hea lth-related and social ser-
vices, and tracking of patien t adherence to the treatment
plan.
Qualifying Statement
The ASAM Practice Guideline is intended to aid clini-
cians in their clinical decision-making and patient manage-
ment. The document strives to identify and define clinical
decision-making junctures that meet the needs of most
patients inmost circumstances . The ultimate judgment about
care of a particular patient must be made together by the
clinician and the patient in light of all the circumstances
presented by the patient. As a result, situations may arise in
which deviations from the Practice Guideline may be appro-
priate. Clinical decision-making should involve consideration
of the quality and availability of expertise and services in the
community wherein care is provided.White et el. /C15Adopted by the ASAM Board of Directors December 18, 2019
18 /C2232020 American Society of Addiction Medicine
Copyright © 2020 American Society of Addiction Medicine. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.In circumstances in which the Practice Guideline is
being used as the basis for regulatory or payer decisions,
improvement in quality of care should be the goal. Finally,
prescribed courses of treatment contained in recommenda-
tions in this Practice Guideline are effective only if the
recommendations, as outlined, are followed. Because lack
of patient understanding and adherence may adversely affect
outcomes, clinicians should make every effort to engage the
patient’s understanding of, and adherence to, prescribed and
recommended pharmacological and psychosocial treatments.
Patients should be informed of the risks, benefits, and alter-
natives to a particular treatment and should be shared parties
to decision-making whenever feasible. ASAM recognizes that
there are challenges to implementation of these guidelines in
certain communities and settings, particularly in relation to
the availability of all FDA approved medications for the
treatment of opioid use disorder and access to psychosocial
treatment in all settings. However, this guideline aims to set
the standard for best clinical practice, providing recommen-
dations for the appropriate care of patients with opioid
use disorder in diverse settings. Recommendations in this
Practice Guideline do not supersede any Federal or state
regulation.
METHODOLOGY
Overview of Approach
These guidelines were developed using the RAND/
UCLA Appropriateness Method (RAM) —a process that com-
bines scientific evidence and clinical knowledge to determine
the appropriateness of a set of clinical procedures.12This
process is particularly appropriate for these guidelines for two
reasons. First, there are few randomized clinical trials (RCTs)
directly comparing the approved medications for the treat-
ment of opioid use disorder. Second, evidence supporting the
efficacy of the individual medications reflects varying years
of research and varying levels of evidence (e.g., nonrandom-
ized studies, retrospective studies). The RCT is the gold
standard for evidence-based medicine. When data are lacking
from RCTs, other methods must be used to help clinicians
make the best choices. In addition, these guidelines are unique
in that they include all three of the medications approved at
present by the FDA in multiple formulations, and they address
the needs of special populations such as pregnant women,
individuals with pain, adolescents, individuals with co-occur-
ring psychiatric disorder, and individuals in the criminal
justice system. Such special populations are often excluded
from RCTs, making the use of RCT data even more difficult.
The RAM process combines the best available scientific
evidence combined with the collective judgment of experts
to yield statements about the appropriateness of specific
procedures that clinicians can apply to their everyday practice.
ASAM’s Quality Improvement Council (QIC) was the
oversight committee for guideline development. The QIC
appointed a Guideline Committee to participate throughout
the development process, rate treatment scenarios, and assist
in writing. In selecting the committee members, the QIC made
every effort to avoid actual, potential, or perceived conflicts of
interest that may arise as a result of relationships with industryand other entities among members of the Guideline Commit-
tee. All QIC members, committee members, and external
reviewers of the guideline were required to disclose all current
related relationships, which are presented in Appendices V-X.
The 2015 Guideline Committee was composed of 11
experts and researchers from multiple disciplines, medical
specialties, and subspecialties, including academic research,
internal medicine, family medicine, addiction medicine,
addiction psychiatry, general psychiatry, obstetrics/gynecol-
ogy, and clinical neurobiology.7Physicians with both allo-
pathic and osteopathic training were represented on the
Guideline Committee. The 2015 Guideline Committee was
assisted by a technical team of researchers from the Treatment
Research Institute (TRI) affiliated with the University of
Pennsylvania and worked under the guidance of Dr. Kyle
Kampman who led the TRI team as Principal Investigator in
implementing the RAM. The 2019 focused update Guideline
Committee under the guidance of the Committee Chair Dr.
Kyle Kampman and Co-Chair Dr. Stephen Wyatt and assisted
by RTI International (see section below titled 2019 Focused
Update for methods specific to the focused update). The RAM
process is a deliberate approach encompassing review of
existing guidelines, literature reviews, appropriateness rat-
ings, necessity reviews, and document development. The
steps are summarized in the flow chart in Exhibit 1 Method-
ology.
2015 Guideline Development
Task 1: Review of Existing Guidelines
Review of Existing Clinical Guidelines. For the 2015 publi-
cation, all existing clinical guidelines that addressed the use of
medications and psychosocial treatments in the treatment of
opioid use disorders including special populations (e.g., preg-
nant women, individuals with pain, and adolescents), and that
were published during the period from January 2000 to April
2014, were identified and reviewed. In total, 49 guidelines
were identified and 34 were ultimately included in the analy-
sis. See Appendix I for a list of the guidelines that were
reviewed. The included guidelines offered evidence-based
recommendations for the treatment of opioid use disorder
using methadone, buprenorphine, and/or naltrexone, as well
as treatment of opioid overdose with naloxone.
Most existing clinical guidelines are based on system-
atic reviews of the literature including appropriateness criteria
used in the RAM. Therefore, the aim of this exercise was not
to re-review all of the research literature, but to identify within
the existing clinical guidelines common questions or consid-
erations that clinicians are likely to raise in the course of
deciding whether and how to use medications as part of the
treatment of individuals with opioid use disorder, and how
they have been addressed.
Analysis of Clinical Guidelines. On the basis of the previously
reviewed existing clinical guidelines, an analytic table was
created and populated to display the identified key compo-
nents. This table served as the foundation for development of
hypothetical statements. The hypothetical statements were/C15Adopted by the ASAM Board of Directors December 18, 2019 NPG for the Treatment of Opioid Use Disorder
/C2232020 American Society of Addiction Medicine 19
Copyright © 2020 American Society of Addiction Medicine. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.sentences describing recommendations derived from the anal-
ysis of the clinical guidelines.
Preparation of Literature Review on Psychosocial Interven-
tions. For the 2015 publication, a review of the literature on
the efficacy of psychosocial treatment delivered in conjunc-
tion with medications for the treatment of opioid use disorder
was conducted. This review was partially supported by fund-
ing from the National Institute on Drug Abuse. Articles were
identified for inclusion in the review through searches con-
ducted in two bibliographic databases (e.g., PsycINFO and
PubMed) using predefined search terms and established
selection criteria. Titles and abstracts were reviewed for
inclusion by two members of the research team.
To increase the overall relevance of the review, the
search was limited to articles in the 6-year period from
January 2008 to December 2014. If the article reflected a
secondary analysis of data from a relevant study, the original
study was included in the literature review. In addition,
findings from three prominent systematic reviews (i.e.,
2007 review on psychosocial interventions in pharmacother-
apy of opioid dependence prepared for the Technical Devel-
opment Group for the World Health Organization, Guidelines
for Psychosocially Assisted Pharmacotherapy of Opioid
Dependence, and two 2011 Cochrane reviews examining
psychosocial and pharmacological treatments for opioid with-
drawal management and psychosocial interventions com-
bined with agonist treatment) were summarized.26–28
The literature search yielded 938 articles. The titles and
abstracts were reviewed to determine if the study met the
inclusion/exclusion criteria, and those that did not ( n¼787)
were removed. The remaining 151 articles were then reviewed
for inclusion, and 27 articles were ultimately retained for use
in the literature review as the others did not meet the pre-
determined inclusion/exclusion criteria. These articles, along
with the relevant systematic reviews of the literature, are
described in the literature review in the next section.
Task 2: Identification of Hypothetical Statements
and Appropriateness Rating
RAND/UCLA Appropriateness Method. The first step in the
RAM is to develop a set of hypothetical statements, which
were derived from the guideline analysis and literature review
described in the previous section, for appropriateness rating.
The analysis and literature review generated a list of 245
hypothetical statements that reflected recommended medical or
psychosocial treatment. Each member of the Guideline Com-
mittee reviewed the guideline analysis and literature review,
and privately rated 245 hypothetical clinical statements on a 9-
point scale of appropriateness. In the context of this Practice
Guideline , the meaning of appropriateness was defined as:
A statement, procedure or treatment is considered to be
appropriate if the expected health benefit (e.g., increased
life expectancy, relief of pain, reduction in anxiety,
improved functional capacity) exceeds the expected nega-
tive consequences (e.g., mortality, morbidity, anxiety, pain)
by a sufficiently wide margin that the procedure is worth
doing, exclusive of cost .An appropriateness score of 1 meant that the statement
was highly inappropriate. An appropriateness rating of 9
meant that the statement was highly appropriate. These
appropriateness ratings were meant to identify consensus,
or a lack thereof, in existing guidelines and research literature.
Guideline Committee Meeting. Upon completion and collec-
tion of the individual Guideline Committee member ratings,
201 out of the 245 hypothetical statements were identified as
meeting the criteria for consensus. The remaining 44 state-
ments had divergent ratings. On September 15, 2014, the
Guideline Committee met in Washington, District of Colum-
bia, to discuss the hypothetical clinical statements. At this
meeting, the committee came to consensus on the hypotheti-
cal statements. After the meeting, the information gathered
was used to revise several of the statements; and the Guideline
Committee was asked to re-rate the revised statements.
Literature Review. A supplementary literature review was also
conducted to identify relevant studies that might resolve
statements that had resulted in divergent ratings during the
Guideline Committee meeting. Information relating to the
vast majority of these divergent ratings was subsequently
found within the existing guideline data set, and consequently
included in the first draft of the Practice Guideline .
For the topics and questions for which answers were not
found in the existing guideline data set, a full literature review
was conducted. The topics and questions for which no further
clarification was found in the literature were considered gaps
that require additional research before inclusion in this guide-
line. These gaps in the literature were: urine drug testing;
patients using cannabis; the safety of delivering injectable
naltrexone doses to patients with high metabolism every 3
weeks; and the safety of adding full agonists to treatment with
buprenorphine for pain management.
Creation and Revision of Guideline Outline. All the identified
appropriate/uncertain hypothetical statements and supporting
research were incorporated into an outline defining each
specific section to be included in the final Practice Guideline .
The draft outline, review of existing guidelines, and literature
review were all sent to the Guideline Committee members for
review and discussion during two web teleconferences and
through private communication. Two teleconferences were
held to ensure full participation from members of the Guide-
line Committee.
Task 3: Comparative Analysis, Review, and
Necessity Rating
Committee Review and Rating. The Guideline Committee then
re-rated the 211 appropriate hypothetical statements for neces-
sity. When rating for necessity, the Guideline Committee
members were asked to adhere to the following guidance:
A statement was considered necessary when all the
following criteria were met:
1. Not providing the service would be considered improper
care.White et el. /C15Adopted by the ASAM Board of Directors December 18, 2019
20 /C2232020 American Society of Addiction Medicine
Copyright © 2020 American Society of Addiction Medicine. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.2. Reasonable chance exists that this procedure and/or ser-
vice will benefit the patient. (A procedure could be
appropriate if it had a low likelihood of benefit, but few
risks; however, such procedures would not be necessary.)
3. The benefit to the patient is of significance and certainty.
(A procedure could be appropriate if it had a minor but
almost certain benefit, but it would not be necessary.)
Necessity is a more stringent criterion than appropri-
ateness. If a procedure is necessary, this means that the
expected benefits outweigh the expected harms (i.e., it is
appropriate), and that they do so by such a margin that the
provider must recommend the service. Of course, patients
may decline to follow their provider’s recommendations.12
Of the 211 rated statements, 184 hypothetical state-
ments met the criteria for being both appropriate and neces-
sary and were incorporated in the guideline.
Final Draft Outline. The final draft outline highlighted hypo-
thetical statements that had been determined to rise to the
level of necessity.
Task 4: Drafting the National Practice Guideline
Draft and Review. A first draft of the Practice Guideline was
created using the Guideline Committee’s recommendations
resulting from supporting evidence and the appropriateness
and necessity ratings discussed above. The first draft of the
Practice Guideline was sent to the Guideline Committee for
review and electronic comment. During a subsequent tele-
conference in January 2015, the Guideline Committee dis-
cussed the comments received via first review. Revisions were
made to the draft, which went again through subsequent
reviews by the Guideline Committee and the ASAM QIC
throughout February and March 2015.
Task 5: External Review
External Review. ASAM sought input from ASAM members,
patient and caregiver groups, and other stakeholders including
experts from the criminal justice system, government agen-
cies, other professional societies, and hospitals and health
systems. ASAM also made the document and a qualitative
review guide available to ASAM members and the general
public for a 2-week period of review and comment. The final
draft Practice Guideline was submitted to the ASAM Board of
Directors in April 2015.
2019 Focused Update New
Between September 2018 and July 2019, ASAM
reconvened an independent committee (see page 2) to oversee
a focused update of this Practice Guideline .7The purpose of
the focused update was to develop new and revised recom-
mendations based on a targeted review of new evidence and
evolving clinical practice guidance. A full update of the
guideline is scheduled to begin in 2021. ASAM’s QIC worked
with a technical team from RTI International (a not-for-profit
research institution based in the Research Triangle Park in
North Carolina) to develop and oversee the scope of work for
the focused update.The methods used to search the literature and subse-
quently develop guideline statements were consistent with the
RAM methodology employed for the 2015 publication.7,12
Criteria for inclusion in the focused update included new
evidence and guidelines that were considered a) clinically
meaningful and applicable to a broad range of clinicians
treating addiction involving opioid use (including those
related to comments received by ASAM from ASAM mem-
bers), and b) urgently needed to ensure the guideline reflects
Exhibit 1. Methodology and Disposition of Results./C15Adopted by the ASAM Board of Directors December 18, 2019 NPG for the Treatment of Opioid Use Disorder
/C2232020 American Society of Addiction Medicine 21
Copyright © 2020 American Society of Addiction Medicine. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.the current state of the science on the existing recommenda-
tions, aligns with other relevant practice guidelines, and
reflects newly approved drugs and formulations. Relevant
evidence and current practices not meeting these criteria will
be reviewed and incorporated into the full update.
A search of Medline’s PubMed database from January
1, 2014 to September 27, 2018 was conducted to identify new
practice guidelines and relevant systematic reviews address-
ing the use of medications and psychosocial treatments in the
treatment of opioid use disorders, including in special pop-
ulations. The archives of the Clinical Guideline Clearing-
house, and key agency and society websites, including the
Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration
(SAMHSA), the Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality,
and the National Institute of Mental Health were also searched
for additional guidelines. The FDA website was searched for
recent relevant drug approvals and mandated label changes
since publication of this Practice Guideline in 2015. A
predefined set of inclusion and exclusion criteria (consistent
with the 2015 process but meeting the above criteria for the
focused update) were applied to identify practice guidelines
and systematic reviews for inclusion in the 2019 Focused
Update . Included guidelines and systematic reviews were not
independently (i.e. outside of what was performed by the
authors) assessed for risk of bias.
The literature search identified 210 unique practice
guidelines and systematic reviews (208 were identified
through initial searches on September 27, 2018; one addi-
tional systematic review was identified through a review of
included guidelines; and a newly published systematic review
from the Institute for Clinical and Economic Review (ICER)
was added on October 26, 2018). Following dual review of
titles and abstracts, 67 publications were retrieved for full-text
review. Eleven practice guidelines and 35 systematic reviews
met criteria for inclusion in the focused update. See Appendix
I for a list of included practice guidelines and systematic
reviews employed.
Key evidence from the identified practice guidelines;
key findings from the systematic reviews; and newly approved
FDA drugs, formulations and mandated label changes were
abstracted and mapped to the existing ASAM recommenda-
tion statements to identify new and evolving clinical practice
guidance, evidence, and recommendations. Using the RAM,
hypothetical statements were developed and presented, along
with supporting evidence, to the focused update Guideline
Committee first for appropriateness rating and later, following
revision, for necessity rating. Thirty statements were gener-
ated for the first round of appropriateness rating. Following
round one, statements were revised, and 24 were presented for
a second round of appropriateness and then necessity rating.
The 24 newly generated statements for the focused update
along with a review of the language in existing statements
resulted in major revisions to 32 existing recommendations
and the addition of 13 new recommendations. In addition, 55
statements underwent minor edits that did not change the
substantive meaning of the original recommendation.
Exhibit 1 describes the methodology employed and
presents the disposition of results for both the original and
focused update guideline development process.As with the 2015 guideline development process, sup-
plementary literature searches were conducted to identify
literature to help resolve differences among committee mem-
bers during the statement rating process and to update key
background information such as opioid use disorder statistics,
recent changes to prescribing regulations, and FDA approvals.
A handful of key systematic reviews and guidelines were
released in the summer of 2019. These are referenced in places
to support the updated guidelines but were not available during
the RAM appropriateness and necessity rating process.
PART 1: ASSESSMENT AND DIAGNOSIS OF
OPIOID USE DISORDER
Comprehensive Assessment
ASAM has published guidance on conducting assess-
ments and diagnosing opioid use disorder in both The ASAM
Criteria and the ASAM Standards of Care for the Addiction
Specialist Physician (the ASAM Standards).2,29The ASAM
Criteria provides comprehensive guidance on conducting a
multidimensional assessment and determining the appropriate
level of care for a given patient. Assessments are structured
around six dimensions that provide a common language of
holistic, biopsychosocial evaluation and treatment across
substance use, physical health, mental health, and broad issues
relevant to recovery. These dimensions include:
1. acute intoxication
2. biomedical conditions and complications
3. emotional, behavioral, or cognitive conditions or compli-
cations
4. readiness for change
5. continued use or continued problem potential
6. recovery/living environment
The ASAM Standards also describe the importance of
comprehensive assessment. Though the assessment process is
ongoing for the patient with substance use disorder, a com-
prehensive assessment is ‘‘a critical aspect of patient engage-
ment and treatment planning’’ and should be conducted
during the initial phase of treatment.29The assessment does
not necessarily need to occur in the first visit; it is critical,
however, to determine emergent or urgent medical problems.
Patients with opioid use disorder often have other physiologi-
cal or psychiatric conditions that may complicate their treat-
ment. These concomitant medical and psychiatric conditions
may need immediate attention and require transfer to a more
intensive level of care (see Part 11: Special Populations:
Individuals with Co-occurring Psychiatric Disorders).
The assessments discussed in this section are critical for
comprehensive treatment planning. However, since patients
with opioid use disorder are at risk for significant harm –
including overdose and overdose death – a delay in comple-
tion of each assessment should not delay or preclude the
initiation of pharmacotherapy for opioid use disorder.
Medical History
The patient’s medical history should include screening
for concomitant medical conditions and routine identificationWhite et el. /C15Adopted by the ASAM Board of Directors December 18, 2019
22 /C2232020 American Society of Addiction Medicine
Copyright © 2020 American Society of Addiction Medicine. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.of medications, allergies, pregnancy, family medical history,
and so on. Particular attention should be paid to the following:
history of infectious diseases such as viral hepatitis, HIV, and
TB; acute trauma; history of injection drug use and related
infections (e.g. infective endocarditis, septic arthritis, osteo-
myelitis, abscesses, cellulitis, etc.); psychiatric, substance
use, addictive behavior, and addiction treatment history;
and any previous history of pharmacotherapy.
Physical Examination
As part of the comprehensive assessment of patients
with opioid use disorder, a physical examination may be
completed by the prescriber him/herself (the clinician autho-
rizing the use of a medication for the treatment of opioid use
disorder) or another member of the clinician’s health system.
The responsible clinician should assure that a current physical
examination (in accordance with the ASAM Standards )is
contained within the patient medical record before (or soon
after) a patient is started on a new medication for the treatment
of his/her opioid use disorder.
The examination should include identifying objective
physical signs of opioid intoxication or withdrawal. Table 2
lists common signs of intoxication and withdrawal. In addi-
tion, the examination should evaluate objective signs of
substance use disorders. See Table 3 for a list of physical
signs of substance use disorders (including opioid use disor-
der).
The examination should also look for common physical
signs of opioid use disorder (see Table 3), and physical health
problems associated with substance use disorders including
sleep disorders, infectious diseases (see Laboratory Tests
section below), pain, cardiovascular disease, and liver disease.
Special attention should be given to identifying injection druguse (IDU) by the presence of new or older puncture marks.
Common injection sites are inside the elbow (cubital fossa)
and forearm, but other sites on the extremities, the neck (i.e.,
external jugular), and the groin (i.e. femoral vein) may be
used. Transition to injection in the neck, groin, and other sites
may occur when the patient has exhausted more peripheral
sites or when the patient is attempting to hide the signs of IDU.
Classical physical signs are not always clear, it may take time
(and subsequent visits) to establish whether a patient has an
opioid use disorder.
Assessment and History Considerations
Specific to Females
Use of contraception and determination of pregnancy are
factors in choosing treatment options for women with opioid
use disorder. Women of childbearing potential should be tested
for pregnancy, and all women of childbearing potential should
be queried regarding methods of contraception. Contraception
and reproductive health are topics of discussion within the
assessment process of female patients who are considering
opioid use disorder treatment. Case management plans may
need to include referral to gynecological services for female
patients.30An in-depth discussion of the treatment of opioid use
disorder in pregnant women is described later in Part 8: Special
Populations: Pregnant Women.
Laboratory Tests
Initial laboratory testing should include a complete
blood count, liver enzyme tests, and tests for TB, hepatitis
B and C, and HIV. Testing for sexually transmitted infections
should be strongly considered. Hepatitis A and B vaccination
should be offered, if appropriate. A complete blood count and
liver enzyme studies should be conducted to screen for liver
dysfunction, infection, and other medical conditions. Abnor-
mal results may require further investigation or referral.
Assessment for Mental Health Status and
Psychiatric Disorder
Patients being evaluated for opioid use disorder, and/or
for possible medication use in the treatment of opioid use
disorder, should undergo an evaluation of possible co-occur-
ring psychiatric disorders, including behavioral addictions
(e.g. gambling disorder, gaming disorder, etc.). During the
assessment process and physical examination, it is important
for the clinician to assess for mental health status consistent
with the ASAM Standards.TABLE 2. Common Signs of Opioid Intoxication and
Withdrawal
Intoxication Signs Withdrawal Signs
Drooping eyelids
Constricted pupils
Reduced respiratory rate
Scratching (due to histamine release)
Head noddingRestlessness, irritability, anxiety
Insomnia
Yawning
Abdominal cramps, diarrhea,
vomiting
Dilated pupils
Sweating
Piloerection
TABLE 3. Objective Physical Signs in Substance Use Disorders
System Findings
Dermatologic Abscesses, rashes, cellulitis, thrombosed veins, jaundice, spider angioma, palmer erythema, scars, track marks,
pock marks from skin popping
Ear, nose, throat, and eyes Pupils pinpoint or dilated, yellow sclera, conjunctivitis, ruptured eardrums, otitis media, discharge from ears,
rhinorrhea, rhinitis, excoriation or perforation of nasal septum, epistaxis, sinusitis, hoarseness, or laryngitis
Mouth Poor dentition, gum disease, abscesses
Cardiovascular Murmurs, arrhythmias
Respiratory Asthma, dyspnea, rales, chronic cough, hematemesis
Musculoskeletal and extremities Pitting edema, broken bones, traumatic amputations, burns on fingers, gynecomastia
Gastrointestinal Hepatomegaly, hernias/C15Adopted by the ASAM Board of Directors December 18, 2019 NPG for the Treatment of Opioid Use Disorder
/C2232020 American Society of Addiction Medicine 23
Copyright © 2020 American Society of Addiction Medicine. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.In the ASAM Standards, I.1 indicates that the physician
‘‘assures that an initial comprehensive, multicomponent
assessment is performed for each patient, either by performing
it her/himself or by assuring it is conducted in full or in part by
another qualified professional within the system in which she/
he is working.’’29A thorough medical and psychiatric history
and family history is indicated as a component of this same
standard. Patients who are identified as exhibiting urgent or
emergent psychiatric conditions, or who are psychiatrically
unstable and represent a danger to themselves or others,
should be referred to the appropriate level of care for their
safety and the safety of others. Further specialty evaluation
may be warranted depending on the severity of indicators for
psychiatric instability. Indicators of psychiatric instability or
disorder include acute suicidal or homicidal ideation, acute
psychosis, and delirium.
Assessment for Substance Use and Treatment
History
A careful evaluation of current and past use of drugs,
including alcohol and nonmedical use of prescription medi-
cations, is required to diagnose opioid use disorder. Because
opioid use disorder may co-occur with other substance use
disorders, the evaluator should assess frequency and quantity
of substance use.
Completing a history of opioid misuse with a patient
who has been identified as using opioids should focus on the
following:
1. type and amount of opioid(s) used recently;
2. route of administration;
3. last use;
4. treatment history; and
5. problems resulting from drug use.
The amount of drug being consumed will impact the
likelihood and severity of withdrawal symptoms when the
drug is stopped, so it is useful to obtain an estimate of the
amount used (each time and number of times per day).
Prescription Drug Monitoring Programs (PDMPs) offer infor-
mation about use of controlled prescription medications,
including opioids. They can serve as important resources
for clinicians’ use in completing full patient clinical assess-
ments of opioid and other controlled substance use history,
and it is recommended that they be utilized. As of June 2019,
Missouri is the only U.S. state without a statewide PDMP.
PDMPs vary with respect to how they are administered, who is
granted access, and which medications are monitored.
In addition, a history of outpatient and inpatient treat-
ment for alcohol and other substance use disorders should be
collected. Clinicians should ask for information about the type
and duration of treatment and outcomes.
Assessment for Co-occurring Substance Use
Opioid use disorder often co-occurs with alcohol, nico-
tine, and other substance use disorders. Therefore, evaluation of
co-occurring alcohol, nicotine, and substance use (including
prescription medication misuse) is recommended. Clinicians
should assess signs and symptoms of alcohol or sedative,hypnotic, or anxiolytic intoxication or withdrawal. Alcohol
or sedative, hypnotic, or anxiolytic withdrawal may result in
seizures, hallucinosis, or delirium, and may represent a medical
emergency. Likewise, concomitant use of alcohol and seda-
tives, hypnotics, or anxiolytics with opioids may contribute to
respiratory depression. While the combined use of these drugs
and opioids increases the risk of serious side effects, the harm
caused by untreated opioid use disorder can outweigh these
risks. Co-occurring substance use disorders should be
addressed concomitantly. Patients with significant co-occur-
ring substance use disorders, especially severe alcohol or
sedative, hypnotic, or anxiolytic use, may require a higher
level of care. When evaluating patients with opioid use disorder,
the clinician should also consider assessing for misuse of other
medications not traditionally considered (e.g. gabapentin). A
2017 systematic review reported that increasing numbers of
patients are self-administering higher than recommended doses
of gabapentinoids (gabapentin and pregabalin) to achieve
euphoric highs. Among opioid users the reported prevalence
of gabapentinoid misuse ranged from 3% to 68%.31
An evaluation of past and current substance use should be
conducted to determine whether addiction involving other sub-
stances is present. For information on drug testing see The ASAM
Appropriate Use of Drug Testing in Clinical Addiction Medicine
guidance document.14Concurrent use of other drugs or active
engagement in other addictive behaviors should lead to consid-
eration of other treatment plan components for the patient. The
presence of co-occurring substance use disorders should provoke
a reevaluation of the level of care in which the patient is treated.
However, if a more intensive level of care is not available or if a
patient is unable or unwilling to engage in a more intensive level
of care, that should not preclude or delay treatment initiation,
including medications. In most cases, co-occurring substance use
will not represent a medical emergency. In such cases, patients
can begin treatment for both their opioid use disorder and co-
occurring alcohol or substance use disorders.
Evidence suggest that individuals who are actively
using other substances during opioid use disorder treatment
may have a poorer prognosis.32–34The Guideline Committee
cautioned against excluding patients from treatment for their
opioid use disorder because they are using cannabis or other
psychoactive substances. All co-occurring substance misuse
should be addressed. While more research is needed, evidence
demonstrates that patients in treatment have better outcomes
than those not retained in treatment.35–37Suspension of
opioid use disorder treatment may increase the risk for death
from overdose, accidents, or other health problems. Contin-
ued use of cannabis or other psychoactive substances may
impede treatment for opioid use disorder; thus, an approach
that addresses all unprescribed substances is likely to result in
the best outcomes. Further research is needed on the outcomes
of patients in opioid use disorder treatment who are continu-
ing the nonmedical use of other psychoactive substances.
Assessment for Nicotine Use
Nicotine use should be queried, and the benefits of
cessation should be promoted routinely with patients present-
ing for evaluation and treatment of opioid use disorder.
Several studies have demonstrated that smoking cessationWhite et el. /C15Adopted by the ASAM Board of Directors December 18, 2019
24 /C2232020 American Society of Addiction Medicine
Copyright © 2020 American Society of Addiction Medicine. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.improves long-term outcomes among individuals receiving
treatment for substance use disorders.37–39
Assessment of Psychosocial and Environmental
Factors
Clinicians should conduct an assessment of the patient’s
social history, readiness for change, and social and environ-
mental factors (as outlined in The ASAM Criteria and the
ASAM Standards) to identify facilitators and barriers to
addiction treatment and long-term recovery, including phar-
macotherapy.2,29In developing a comprehensive treatment
plan for the patient with opioid use disorder, the patient should
receive a multidimensional assessment (as described in The
ASAM Criteria) .The ASAM Criteria uses six dimensions to
create a holistic biopsychosocial assessment of an individual
to be used for service planning and treatment as described
above.2The use of medications for patients with opioid use
disorder can be appropriate across all levels of care. Pharma-
cotherapy is not a level of care in addiction treatment, but one
component of multidisciplinary treatment. ASAM recom-
mends that the use of medications in the treatment of addic-
tion be part of a comprehensive treatment plan appropriate to
the patient’s needs and to the resources available in the
patient’s community. The use of medication(s) is only one
component of overall treatment.
Diagnosing Opioid Use Disorder
Opioid use disorder is primarily diagnosed on the basis
of the history provided by the patient and a comprehensive
assessment that includes a physical examination and labora-
tory testing, including drug testing. Corroborating informa-
tion reported by significant others can be used to confirm the
diagnosis, especially when there is lack of clarity or incon-
sistency in information. Other clinicians may make a diagno-
sis of opioid use disorder; however, prescriber confirmation of
the diagnosis is required before medications are prescribed.
DSM-5 Criteria for Diagnosis
The diagnosis of opioid use disorder is based on
criteria outlined in the DSM-5. The criteria describe a
problematic pattern of opioid use leading to clinically sig-
nificant impairment or distre ss. There are 11 diagnostic
criteria and severity is specif ied as either mild (presence
of 2-3 symptoms), moderate (presence of 4-5 symptoms) or
severe (presence of 6 or more symptoms) within a 12-month
period. Opioid use disorder requires that at least two of the
following 11 criteria be met within a 12-month period: (1)
taking opioids in larger amounts or over a longer period of
time than intended; (2) having a persistent desire or unsuc-
cessful attempts to reduce or control opioid use; (3) spending
excess time obtaining, using or recovering from opioids; (4)
craving for opioids; (5) continuing opioid use causing
inability to fulfill work, hom e, or school responsibilities;
(6) continuing opioid use despite having persistent social or
interpersonal problems; (7) lack of involvement in social,
occupational or recreational activities; (8) using opioids in
physically hazardous situations ; (9) continuing opioid use in
spite of awareness of persistent physical or psychological
problems; (10) tolerance, in cluding need for increasedamounts of opioids or diminished effect with continued
use at the same amount —as long as the patient is not taking
opioids under medical supervision; and (11) withdrawal
manifested by characteris tic opioid withdrawal syndrome
or taking opioids to relieve or avoid withdrawal symptoms —
as long as the patient is not taking opioids under medical
supervision.5
More detail about diagnosing opioid use disorder is
available in the American Psychiatric Association: Diagnostic
and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, Fifth Edition.
Arlington, VA, American Psychiatric Association, 2013.
Withdrawal Scales
There are several useful opioid withdrawal scales that
can assist the clinician in evaluating patients with opioid use
disorder by identifying and quantifying the severity of opioid
withdrawal symptoms. The Objective Opioid Withdrawal
Scale (OOWS), which relies on clinical observation, is useful
in measuring and documenting the objectively measurable
symptoms of opioid withdrawal. The Subjective Opioid
Withdrawal Scale (SOWS) records the patient’s rating of
opioid withdrawal on a 16-item scale.40The Clinical Opioid
Withdrawal Scale (COWS) includes 11 items, and contains
signs and symptoms of opioid withdrawal, which are both
objective and subjective in nature.40Finally, The Clinical
Institute Narcotic Assessment (CINA) also includes 11 items
and can help determine the severity of symptoms.41
Drug and Alcohol Testing
Urine drug testing, or other reliable biological tests for
the presence of drugs and alcohol, can be used in the process
of assessment and diagnosis to validate patient self-reported
information and identify poly-substance use. Testing should
also be used to monitor patients for adherence to medication
and for use of illicit and controlled substances during treat-
ment. A variety of toxicology tests are available, some with
greater and lesser reliability and validity. The person who is
interpreting these labs should be very familiar with the
methodology and the reliability. Little research exists on
the optimal frequency of testing. The recommendations given
below are based on the consensus opinion of the Guideline
Committee. The frequency of drug testing will be determined
by a number of factors, including the stability of the patient,
the type of treatment, and the treatment setting. Providers
should also look to the test’s detection capabilities and
windows of detection to help determine the frequency of
testing. Patients will likely require more testing early in
treatment or during periods of relapse. Patients participating
in treatment for opioid use disorder at OTPs are mandated by
state regulations and the Federal law42to receive a minimum
of eight drug tests per year, but may be tested more frequently
based on clinical need. A 2017 consensus statement by ASAM
states that the eight drug tests per year currently required
should be viewed as a minimum. Many patients will require
more frequent testing, and determinations about optimal
frequency are best made on an individualized basis.14For
more information on drug testing see The ASAM Appropriate
Use of Drug Testing in Clinical Addiction Medicine guidance
document./C15Adopted by the ASAM Board of Directors December 18, 2019 NPG for the Treatment of Opioid Use Disorder
/C2232020 American Society of Addiction Medicine 25
Copyright © 2020 American Society of Addiction Medicine. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.In general, opioids, and most other substances of inter-
est, are detectable in the urine for 1–3 days after use. A
negative test does not rule out opioid use disorder or physical
dependence. Urine, or other body fluid, testing is also helpful
to identify use of other psychoactive substances.
Summary of Recommendations
Assessment Recommendations
1. The first clinical priority should be given to identifying
and making appropriate referral for any urgent or emer-
gent medical or psychiatric problem(s), including drug-
related impairment or overdose.
2.
 Comprehensive assessment of the patient is
critical for treatment planning. However, completion of
all assessments should not delay or preclude initiating
pharmacotherapy for opioid use disorder. If not com-
pleted before initiating treatment, assessments should be
completed soon thereafter.
3.
 Completion of the patient’s medi-
cal history should include screening for concomitant
medical conditions, including psychiatric disorders,
infectious diseases (viral hepatitis, HIV, and tuberculosis
[TB]), acute trauma, and pregnancy.
4.
 A physical examination should be
completed as a component of the comprehensive assess-
ment process. The prescriber (the clinician authorizing
the use of a medication for the treatment of opioid use
disorder) should ensure that a current physical examina-
tion is contained within the patient medical record before
(or soon after) a patient is started on pharmacotherapy.
5.
 Initial laboratory testing should
include a complete blood count, liver enzyme tests,
and tests for TB, hepatitis B and C, and HIV. Testing
for sexually transmitted infections should be strongly
considered. Hepatitis A and B vaccinations should be
offered, if appropriate.
6.
 Women of childbearing potential
should be tested for pregnancy, and all women of child-
bearing potential should be queried regarding methods
of contraception.
7.
 Patients being evaluated for opioid
use disorder, and/or for possible medication use in the
treatment of opioid use disorder, should undergo (or have
completed) an assessment of mental health status and
possible psychiatric disorders (such as is outlined in The
ASAM Criteria andThe ASAM Standards ).2,29
8.
 Opioid use disorder is often co-
occurring with other substance use disorders. Evaluation
of a patient with opioid use disorder should include a
detailed history of other past and current substance use
and substance use disorders.
9.
 The use of cannabis, stimulants,
alcohol, and/or other addictive drugs should not be a
reason to withhold or suspend opioid use disorder treat-
ment. However, patients who are actively using substan-
ces during opioid use disorder treatment may require
greater support including a more intensive level of care
(see The ASAM Criteria andThe ASAM Standards ).2,2910.
 The use of benzodiazepines and
other sedative-hypnotics should not be a reason to with-
hold or suspend treatment with methadone or buprenor-
phine. While the combined use of these medications
increases the risk of serious side effects, the harm caused
by untreated opioid use disorder can outweigh these risks.
A risk-benefit analysis should be conducted, and greater
support should be provided including careful medication
management to reduce risks.13
11.
 A nicotine use query should be
completed routinely for all patients and counseling on
cessation of the use of tobacco products and electronic
nicotine delivery devices (e.g. vaping) provided if indi-
cated.
12.
 As part of comprehensive care the
patient should receive a multidimensional assessment (as
described in The ASAM Criteria ), including an assess-
ment of social and environmental factors to identify
facilitators and barriers to addiction treatment and
long-term recovery (including pharmacotherapy). Addic-
tion is a complex biopsychosocial illness, for which the
use of medication(s) is only one component of compre-
hensive treatment.2
Diagnosis Recommendations
1.
 Other clinicians may diagnose opi-
oid use disorder, but confirmation of the diagnosis must be
obtained by the prescriber before pharmacotherapy for
opioid use disorder commences.
2. Opioid use disorder is primarily diagnosed on the basis of
the history provided by the patient and a comprehensive
assessment that includes a physical examination.
3.
 Validated clinical scales that mea-
sure withdrawal symptoms may be used to assist in the
evaluation of patients with opioid use disorder.
4.
 Drug testing is recommended
during the comprehensive assessment process, and
during treatment to monitor patients for adherence to
prescribed medications and use of alcohol, illicit, and
controlled substances. The frequency of testing is deter-
mined by several factors including stability of the patient,
type of treatment, and treatment setting. For additional
information see The ASAM Appropriate Use of Drug
Testing in Clinical Addiction Medicine guidance docu-
ment.14
Areas for Further Research
1. More research is needed on best practices for drug testing
during the initial evaluation and throughout the entire
treatment process.
2. Further research is needed on evidence-based approaches
for treating opioid use disorder in patients who continue to
use alcohol, cannabis, and/or other psychoactive substan-
ces.
3. Assessment and diagnosis of OUD is occurring increas-
ingly in nontraditional settings, including hospital emer-
gency departments and primary care. Implementation
research is needed to determine the most effective tools
and models for assessment and diagnosis in these settings.White et el. /C15Adopted by the ASAM Board of Directors December 18, 2019
26 /C2232020 American Society of Addiction Medicine
Copyright © 2020 American Society of Addiction Medicine. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.PART 2: TREATMENT OPTIONS
Introduction
Once the diagnosis of opioid use disorder has been
established, and the patient is determined to be medically and
psychiatrically stable, the next task is to decide on a course of
treatment. Treatment options include pharmacotherapy with
one of three medications – methadone, buprenorphine, or
naltrexone – and psychosocial treatment. Withdrawal man-
agement alone can be the first step but is not a treatment for
opioid use disorder and should only be considered as a part of
a comprehensive and longitudinal plan of care.
Behavior change is an important part of recovery, that
may be facilitated by psychosocial treatment. However, these
treatments take time to be effective. Medications work
quickly to reduce the risk for overdose and overdose death.
Thus, the combination of pharmacotherapy and psychosocial
treatments, tailored to the individual’s needs, is the recom-
mended standard of care. Medications work rapidly to restore
balance to the brain circuits impacted by addiction, reducing
cravings and withdrawal symptoms and enabling patients to
address the psychosocial factors that contribute to their
disease and establish healthier patterns of behavior to support
long-term recovery.
The choice among available treatment options should be
a shared decision between the clinician and the patient. A
number of factors should be considered in deciding what
treatment(s) to choose. Among the first considerations are the
priorities of the patient, for instance: Is the patient open to
pharmacotherapy? Does the patient have access to an OTP?
What type of treatment setting does the patient prefer? Does
the patient understand the pros and cons of the treatment
medication options? A patient’s past experiences with treat-
ment for opioid use disorder should be considered as well. Of
course, above all, evidence supporting the potential efficacy
and safety of the various treatments is critically important.
For most patients with opioid use disorder, the use of
medications (combined with psychosocial treatment) is supe-
rior to psychosocial treatment on its own; this is true for
agonist, partial agonist, and antagonist medications. Evidence
suggests that both methadone and buprenorphine maintenance
treatments are superior to withdrawal management alone and
both significantly reduce illicit opioid use.15,36Further, mor-
tality is lower in patients on methadone or buprenorphine, as
compared to those not undergoing treatment.9,43Methadone
and buprenorphine also lower the risk of acquiring or spread-
ing HIV infection.44–46In clinical studies, evidence favors
buprenorphine, compared to no treatment, in decreasing
heroin use and improving treatment retention.35,47Evidence
also supports the efficacy of extended-release injectable
naltrexone versus placebo for prevention of relapse to opioid
use disorder.48–50
Pharmacotherapy Options
The medications covered in this Practice Guideline
include those that have been approved by the FDA for the
treatment of opioid use disorder. (See Appendix III for an
overview of the main pharmacotherapy options and Appendix
IV for a summary of available formulations). The FDAapprovals for these medications have primarily been for
‘opioid dependence’ as defined in prior versions of the
DSM, and not necessarily the definition contained in the
current version of the manual, the DSM-5. DSM-5 combined
opioid abuse and opioid dependence criteria from prior
versions of the DSM and included them in the new definition
of opioid use disorder. As a result, pharmacologic treatment
may not be appropriate for all patients along the entire opioid
use disorder continuum (i.e. for individuals with new onset,
mild opioid use disorder). In a study comparing opioid
dependence from DSM-4 and opioid use disorder from
DSM-5, optimal concordance occurred when four or more
DSM-5 criteria were endorsed (i.e., the DSM-5 threshold for
moderate opioid use disorder).11
The medications discussed in this Practice Guideline all
have evidence supporting their safety and efficacy. While
other medications have been used off-label to treat opioid use
disorder the Guideline Committee has not issued recommen-
dations on the use of these medications, with some exceptions
(clearly noted in the text). Cost efficacy was not a consider-
ation in the development of this Practice Guideline .
Each medication will be discussed in detail in subse-
quent sections:
1. Methadone (mu-agonist) for opioid use disorder treatment
and opioid withdrawal management (part 4).
2. Buprenorphine (partial mu-agonist) for opioid use disorder
treatment and opioid withdrawal management (part 5).
3. Naltrexone (antagonist) for opioid use disorder relapse
prevention (part 6).
4. Naloxone (antagonist) to reverse an opioid overdose
(part 13).
5. Lofexidine (alpha-2 adrenergic agonist) for opioid with-
drawal management (Part 3)
6. Clonidine (alpha-2 adrenergic agonist) for opioid with-
drawal management (Part 3)
Since the 2015 publication of this Practice Guideline ,i n
May 2018, the FDA approved the alpha-2 adrenergic agonist,
lofexidine, as a treatment for withdrawal symptoms when
opioids are abruptly discontinued.51Lofexidine will be cov-
ered in ‘‘Part 3: Treating Opioid Withdrawal’’. The only
medication that is not FDA-approved for the treatment of
opioid use disorder that will be covered in this Practice
Guideline is another alpha-2 adrenergic agonist, clonidine,
commonly used off-label for the treatment of opioid with-
drawal (see Part 3: Treating Opioid Withdrawal).
Key outcomes in evaluating the efficacy of the various
pharmacotherapies include, decreased mortality, abstinence
from opioids, and retention in treatment. In regards to these
key outcomes, a 2016 Cochrane Collaboration meta-analysis
found no difference between methadone and buprenorphine in
retaining patients in treatment, reducing illicit opioid use or in
reported adverse events.52A 2016 systematic review con-
ducted by the Canadian Agency for Drugs and Technologies
in Health (CADTH) found methadone and buprenorphine/
naloxone equally effective in reducing mortality, found that
patients on buprenorphine/naloxone were more likely to
abstain from opioid use, and found that more patients on
methadone were retained in treatment.53The same review/C15Adopted by the ASAM Board of Directors December 18, 2019 NPG for the Treatment of Opioid Use Disorder
/C2232020 American Society of Addiction Medicine 27
Copyright © 2020 American Society of Addiction Medicine. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.found that higher doses of both medications were more
effective than lower doses.50An earlier Cochrane Collabora-
tion meta-analysis also found methadone more effective than
buprenorphine in retaining patients in treatment when bupre-
norphine doses are flexible but found that at fixed medium or
high doses (16 mg and above), buprenorphine was as effective
as methadone in retaining patients in treatment.15,36As noted
earlier, there is strong evidence supporting the superiority of
methadone and buprenorphine/(with or without naloxone)
over medication-free treatment for reducing mortality, reduc-
ing opioid use, and promoting treatment retention.15,54
Opioid Dosing Considerations: Opioid Use
Disorder Versus Chronic Pain
Guidelines for morphine milligram equivalents (MME)
for opioid dosing for chronic pain are not applicable to the
treatment of opioid use disorder. Higher MME dosage of
medications used in the treatment of opioid use disorder are
necessary and clinically indicated for effective treatment. The
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention specifically advi-
ces against misapplication of the Guideline for Prescribing
Opioids for Chronic Pain for patients receiving or starting
medication for opioid use disorder.55See ASAM’s public
policy statement on Morphine Equivalent Units/Morphine
Milligram Equivalents for additional details.56
Efficacy Considerations
Treatment Setting
The treatment setting described as Level 1 treatment in The
ASAM Criteria may be a general outpatient location such as a
clinician’s practice site. The setting described as Level 2 in The
ASAM Criteria may be an intensive outpatient treatment or partial
hospitalization program housed in a specialty addiction treatment
facility, a community mental hea lth center, or another setting. The
ASAM Criteria describes Level 3 or Level 4 treatment, respec-
tively, as a residential addiction treatment facility or hospital.2
In accordance with Federal laws and regulations derived
from the Harrison Act and Congressional exceptions to that
1914 law, the venue in which treatment for opioid use disorder
is provided is as important a consideration as is the specific
medication selected (methadone vs. buprenorphine vs. nal-
trexone).57OTPs are subject to both Federal and state laws
that have implications for patient treatment. Federal and state-
licensed OTPs dispense and offer daily supervised dosing of
methadone. Some OPTs also offer the option of daily super-
vised dosing of buprenorphine.
In accordance with Federal law 21 CFR §1306.07,
physicians, NPs, PAs and other qualifying practitioners, in
private practices, or various other types of private and public
sector clinics, can be authorized to prescribe the partial opioid
agonist buprenorphine. Buprenorphine, but not methadone,
can be prescribed via regular outpatient prescriptions filled in
a retail pharmacy (OBOT). This flexibility to provide OBOT
is discussed more in Part 5: Buprenorphine. Existing regu-
lations governing buprenorphine do not address the treatment
facilities, but rather the individual clinician who prescribes
buprenorphine (see Part 5: Buprenorphine for clinician qual-
ifications associated with OBOT).Methadone and buprenorphine can also be administered
by non-waivered clinicians in emergency department and
hospital settings under limited circumstances. Any clinician
with the prescribing authority can provide either of these
medications in a hospital inpatient setting:
/C15for withdrawal management or maintenance pharmaco-
therapy for a patient as an adjunct to treatment for another
medical condition (other than a substance use disorder);
/C15to patients who have already been prescribed one of these
medications and are admitted to the hospital, or treated in
the emergency department;
In medical emergencies buprenorphine or methadone
can be ordered and administered by non-waivered clinicians
for no more than 3-days to treat acute withdrawal symptoms
while arranging for the patient’s referral for treatment as long
as not more than one day’s medication is administered or
given to a patient at one time.58
Naltrexone can be prescribed in any setting by any
clinician with the authority to prescribe medications. It is
not listed among Federal or state-controlled substances sched-
ules, and there are no regulations of facilities or prescribers for
the use of naltrexone in the treatment of opioid use disorder
(such that there are for OTP and OBOT).
Clinicians should consider a patient’s psychosocial situa-
tion, co-occurring disorders, and opportunities for treatment
retention versus risks of diversion when determining whether
OTP or OBOT is most appropriate. Patients with active co-
occurring alcohol, sedative, hypnotic, or anxiolytic use disorder
(or who are in treatment for addiction involving the use of alcohol
or other sedative drugs, including benzodiazepines or benzodi-
azepine receptor agonists) may need a more intensive level of
care than can be provided in an office-based setting; this may also
be true for persons who are regularly using alcohol or other
sedatives, but do not meet the diagnostic criteria for a substance
use disorder related to that class of drugs. However, OBOT
services should not be withheld if the patient does not have access
to or is unwilling to participate in a more intensive level of care.
In these cases, the patient should be carefully monitored.
The use of benzodiazepines and other sedative-hyp-
notics should not be a reason to withhold or suspend treat-
ment. According to the FDA, while the combined use of these
drugs increases the risk of serious side effects, the harm
caused by untreated opioid use disorder can outweigh these
risks. A risk-benefit analysis should be conducted, and greater
support should be provided including careful medication
management to reduce risks. The prescribing of benzodiaze-
pines or other sedative-hypnotics should be used with caution
in patients with opioid use disorder, and particularly for
patients who are prescribed methadone or buprenorphine.
Pharmacology
Differences in efficacy may also arise from differences
in pharmacology; whereas methadone is a full agonist at the
mu-opioid receptor and produces higher levels of physiologi-
cal dependence; buprenorphine is a partial agonist associated
with less physiological dependence. As discussed, methadone
and buprenorphine (at sufficient doses) appear equally effec-
tive in reducing mortality, retaining patients in treatment and inWhite et el. /C15Adopted by the ASAM Board of Directors December 18, 2019
28 /C2232020 American Society of Addiction Medicine
Copyright © 2020 American Society of Addiction Medicine. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.reducing opioid use.15,59Evidence supports the efficacy of
extended-release injectable naltrexone for relapse prevention
compared to a placebo control.48,49A recent study comparing
extended-release naltrexone to sublingual buprenorphine/nal-
oxone found it was more difficult to initiate treatment with
extended-release naltrexone resulting in a higher rate of early
relapse among those randomized to extended-release naltrex-
one compared with those randomized to buprenorphine/nalox-
one.60Notably however, for those who successfully initiated
treatment, extended-release naltrexone and buprenorphine/nal-
oxone were similarly effective. Fatal overdose, non-fatal over-
dose, and other serious adverse events did not differ between
treatment groups.60Similarly, a 12-week open-label RCT
found extended-release naltrexone was similar to buprenor-
phine/naloxone in maintaining short-term abstinence from
illicit opioids following successful initiation.61Further study is needed on the relative effectiveness of
extended-release naltrexone in reducing mortality compared
with methadone or buprenorphine. A recent retrospective
cohort study including data from more than 17,000 adults
without cancer who survived an opioid overdose found
decreased all-cause mortality and opioid-related mortality
among patients treated with buprenorphine but could not
draw any conclusions about the effect of naltrexone on
mortality due to uncertainty in the estimates.62
Contraindications and Precautions
The following section describes the major indications,
contraindications, and precautions for methadone, buprenor-
phine, and naltrexone. This section is a summary and is not
an exhaustive description of medication information
(Table 4).
TABLE 4. Contraindications and Precautions for Pharmacotherapy Options3,63,64
Medication Contraindications Warnings and Precautions
Methadone 1. Hypersensitivity
2. Respiratory depression
3. Severe bronchial asthma or hypercapnia
4. Paralytic ileus1. Head injury and increased intracranial pressure
2. Liver disease
3. Respiratory insufficiency
4. Cardiac conduction effects
5. Drug interactions with medications metabolized by cytochrome p450 enzymes
principally CYP34A, CYP2B6, CYP2C19, and to a lesser extent by CYP2C9and
CYP2D6
6. Drugs co-administered with methadone, especially anti-retrovirals (including
PrEP), anti-convulsants, and rifampin, should be evaluated for interaction
potential
7. Diversion and misuse are possible
8. Physical dependence
9. Risk of life-threatening respiratory depression and death when used in association
with benzodiazepines or other CNS depressants including alcohol, other opioid,
and illicit drugs
10. Interaction with antidepressants and migraine medicines can cause a serious
CNS reaction called serotonin syndrome
11. Addison’s disease, a rare, but serious condition in which the adrenal glands do
not produce adequate amounts of the hormone cortisol
12. Neonatal withdrawal after use of methadone during pregnancy
Buprenorphine (all
formulations)Hypersensitivity 1. Not recommended for patients with severe hepatic impairment
2. May cause sedation
3. Physical dependence
4. Risk of life-threatening respiratory depression and death when used in association
with benzodiazepines or other CNS depressants including alcohol, other opioids,
and illicit drugs
5. Precipitated withdrawal if used in patients physically dependent on full agonists
opioids before the agonist effects have worn off
6. Interaction with antidepressants and migraine medicines can, in rare cases, cause
a serious CNS reaction called serotonin syndrome
7. Addison’s disease, a rare, but serious condition in which the adrenal glands do
not produce adequate amounts of the hormone cortisol
8. Diversion and misuse are possible
9. Neonatal withdrawal after use of buprenorphine during pregnancy
Naltrexone (oral
and injectable
formulations)1. Hypersensitivity reactions to naltrexone,
or for injectable previous hypersensitivity
reactions to polylactide-co-glycolide
carboxymethylcellulose, or any other
constituent of the diluent
2. Active hepatitis (hepatitis or if LFTs
are>3x normal)
3. Patients currently physically dependent
on opioids, including partial agonists
4. Patients receiving opioid analgesics
5. Patients in acute opioid withdrawal1. Vulnerability to overdose
2. Injection site reactions associated with injectable naltrexone
3. Precipitated opioid withdrawal
4. Administer IM injections with caution to patients with thrombocytopenia or a
coagulation disorder
5. Risk of hepatotoxicity
6. Patient should be monitored for the development of depression and suicidality
7. Emergency reversal of opiate blockade may require special monitoring in a
critical care setting
8. Eosinophil pneumonia has been reported in association with injectable naltrexone
9. Insufficient evidence of safety during pregnancy/C15Adopted by the ASAM Board of Directors December 18, 2019 NPG for the Treatment of Opioid Use Disorder
/C2232020 American Society of Addiction Medicine 29
Copyright © 2020 American Society of Addiction Medicine. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.Methadone
Methadone is frequently used to manage opioids
withdrawal symptoms and is recommended for pharmaco-
logical treatment of opioid use disorder (see Part 4: Metha-
done).
Methadone is contraindicated for the following condi-
tions:
1. Patients with known hypersensitivity to methadone hydro-
chloride.
2. Patients experiencing respiratory depression (in the
absence of resuscitative equipment or in unmonitored
settings).
3. Patients with acute bronchial asthma or hypercapnia (also
known as hypercarbia).
4. Patients with known or suspected paralytic ileus.
Methadone should be used with caution for the follow-
ing conditions:
1. Patients with decompensated liver disease (e.g., jaundice,
ascites) due to increased risk of hepatic encephalopathy.
2. Patients with respiratory insufficiency.
3. Patients with concomitant substance use disorders,
particularly patients with seda tive, hypnotic, or anxiolytic
use disorders. Interacti ons between methadone and
hypnotics, sedatives, or anxiolytics may be life-threaten-
ing.
4. Patients with concomitant psychiatric diagnoses that
impair their ability to maintain daily attendance at an OTP.
5. Patients with low levels of physical dependence to opioids
should be started with low doses of methadone.
Significant medication interactions to consider before
starting methadone are as follows:
1. Methadone may prolong the QT interval and should be
used in caution with other agents that may also prolong the
QT interval. These include class I or class III anti-arrhyth-
mic drugs, calcium channel blockers, some antipsychotics,
and some antidepressants. (See Figure A for discussion of
cardiac risk management)
2. Methadone is metabolized through the cytochrome P450
enzyme pathway. Many agents interact with this pathway
including alcohol, anticonvulsants, antiretrovirals, and
macrolide antibiotics.
Buprenorphine
Buprenorphine is a partial mu opioid receptor agonist
available in a variety of formulations, several which have been
newly approved by the FDA since publication of the 2015
practice guideline (see Table 1). Buprenorphine is recom-
mended for pharmacological treatment of opioid use disorder
(see Part 5: Buprenorphine).
Buprenorphine is also an effe ctive treatment for opioid
withdrawal with efficacy similar to methadone, and superior
to lofexidine or clonidine in opioid withdrawal manage-
ment47,57,65,66Opioid withdrawal mana gement (i.e. detoxi-
fication) on its own, without ongoing treatment for opioid
use disorder, is not a treatment method for opioid usedisorder and is not recommended. Ongoing maintenance
medication, in combination with psychosocial treatment
appropriate for the patient’s needs, is the standard of care
for treating opioid use disorder.
If the decision is made to taper, patients should be
advised about the risk of relapse and other safety concerns,
including increased risk of overdose and overdose death.
Insufficient evidence is available on the relative effectiveness
of different rates of tapering the buprenorphine dose. One
trial did find that longer courses of buprenorphine with
gradual tapering were superior to rapid tapering for with-
drawal.67
Buprenorphine is contraindicated for the following
conditions:
1. Patients with hypersensitivity to buprenorphine or any
component of the formulation.
2. Patients with severe liver impairment are not good can-
didates for office-based treatment with buprenorphine.
(Patients with hepatitis C infection who do not have severe
liver impairment may, however, be considered for office-
based buprenorphine treatment.)
Buprenorphine should be used with caution for the
following conditions:
1. Patients with current or previous hepatic dysfunction. A
direct comparison of the e ffects of buprenorphine
and methadone, however, showed no evidence of liver
damage during the initial 6 months in either treatment
groups.68Monitoring liver enzymes in patients at
increased risk for hepatotoxicity may be considered.
2. Patients who, at present, have an alcohol use or sedative,
hypnotic, or anxiolytic use disorder.
3. Patients with hypovolemia, severe cardiovascular disease,
or taking drugs that may exaggerate hypotensive effects.
Buprenorphine may cause hypotension, including ortho-
static hypotension and syncope.
Significant medication interactions to consider before
starting buprenorphine include the following:
1. Alcohol and sedatives, hypnotics, or anxiolytics may
enhance the central nervous system (CNS) depressive
effect of buprenorphine.
2. Buprenorphine is metabolized to nor-buprenorphine
primarily by cytochrome CYP3A4; therefore, potential
interactions may occur when buprenorphine is
given concurrently with agents that affect CYP3A4
activity. The concomitant use of buprenorphine with
CYP3A4 inhibitors (e.g., azole antifungals such as
ketoconazole, macrolide antibiotics such as erythromy-
cin, and HIV protease inhibitors) should be monitored
and may require dose reduction of one or both
agents.63,65,66,69
In 2016, based on literature reviews involving the
entire class of opioid pain medications and a review of
reported adverse events, the FDA required the addition
of warnings on all opioid product labels (including
methadone and buprenorphine). Required warnings include
the following:White et el. /C15Adopted by the ASAM Board of Directors December 18, 2019
30 /C2232020 American Society of Addiction Medicine
Copyright © 2020 American Society of Addiction Medicine. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.1. There is a risk of life-threatening respiratory depression and
death with concomitant use of methadone or buprenorphine
with benzodiazepines or other CNS depressants.70
2. Opioids (including methadone and buprenorphine) can
interact with antidepressants and migraine medicines to
cause a serious CNS reaction called serotonin syndrome,
in which high levels of the chemical serotonin build up in
the brain and cause toxicity.71
3. Use of opioids (including methadone and buprenorphine)
may lead to Addison’s disease, a rare, but serious condition
in which the adrenal glands do not produce adequate
amounts of the hormone cortisol.71
4. Long-term use of opioids (including methadone and
buprenorphine) may be associated with decreased sex
hormone levels and symptoms such as decreased libido,
impotence, or infertility.70
In September 2017, the FDA released an additional drug
safety communication stating that based on additional review,
the ‘‘FDA is advising that the opioid addiction medications
buprenorphine and methadone should not be withheld from
patients taking benzodiazepines or other drugs that depress
the CNS. The combined use of these drugs increases the risk
of serious side effects; however, the harm caused by untreated
opioid addiction can outweigh these risks. Careful medication
management by health care professionals can reduce these
risks.’’13
While acknowledging the seriousness of each of these
warnings, the Guideline Committee notes that when metha-
done and buprenorphine are used as prescribed and when
treatment is carefully monitored by clinicians, these adverse
events are rare and treatment benefits outweigh the risks of
no treatment.
Naltrexone
Extended-release injectable naltrexone, administered
every 3-4 weeks, is recommended for patients who are no
longer physically dependent on opioids for preventing relapse
in opioid use disorder (see Part 6: Naltrexone). Naltrexone is
an opioid antagonist that blocks the effects of opioids and is
used to prevent relapse in patients who are no longer depen-
dent on opioids. Naltrexone causes immediate withdrawal
symptoms (precipitated withdrawal) in a person with active
physical dependence on opioids. There are oral and extended-
release injectable formulas of naltrexone. Oral naltrexone
often lacks effectiveness due to poor medication adherence72
and in a meta-analysis was not found to be superior to placebo
or to no pharmacological treatments in treatment retention or
illicit opioid use reduction.73Oral naltrexone should only be
used under limited circumstances. For example, if taken daily,
oral naltrexone can be effective in patients who are highly
motivated or legally mandated to receive treatment, and/or
when taking the medication is closely supervised. Clinicians
may therefore want to reserve using oral naltrexone for
patients who are able to comply with special techniques to
enhance their adherence. While extended-release injectable
naltrexone formulation may improve the adherence limita-
tions of the oral formulation, studies suggest that adherence to
extended-release naltrexone is lower than that of buprenor-
phine.74Naltrexone is contraindicated in patients:
1. with hypersensitivity reactions to naltrexone.
2. who have previously exhibited hypersensitivity to naltrex-
one, polylactide-co-glycolide, carboxymethyl-cellulose,
or any other components of the diluent (for extended-
release injectable naltrexone).
3. with current physical dependence on opioids, including
partial agonists.
4. in acute opioid withdrawal.
5. who have failed the naloxone challenge test (see Glossary)
or who test positive for opioids.
Naltrexone should be used with caution under the
following conditions:
1. All patients should be warned of the risk of hepatic injury
and advised to seek medical attention if they experience
symptoms of acute hepatitis. Hepatic injury is a concern if
very high doses are used, for example, 200–300 mg per
day. Use of naltrexone should be discontinued in the event
of symptoms and/or signs of acute hepatitis. Cases of
hepatitis and clinically significant liver dysfunction were
observed in association with naltrexone exposure during
the clinical development program and in the postmarket-
ing period. Transient, asymptomatic hepatic transaminase
elevations were also observed in the clinical trials and
postmarketing period.
2. Patients who are pregnant or breastfeeding. Clinicians
should discuss the paucity of research on the risks (if
any) of naltrexone on fetal development.
3. Patients with liver impairment should complete liver
enzyme tests before and during treatment with naltrexone
to check for additional liver impairment.
4. Patients who experience injection site reactions should be
monitored for pain, redness, or swelling. Incorrect admin-
istration may increase the risk of injection site reactions.
Reactions have occurred with extended-release injectable
naltrexone.
5. Patients with co-occurring psychiatric disorders should be
monitored for adverse events. Suicidal thoughts, attempted
suicide, and depression have been reported.
Significant medication interactions to consider before
starting naltrexone include the following:
1. Naltrexone should not be used with methylnaltrexone
or naloxegol.
2. Naltrexone blocks the effects of opioid analgesics because
it is an opioid antagonist.
3. Glyburide may increase serum concentration of naltrex-
one. Monitor for increased toxicity effects of naltrexone
(e.g. liver enzyme elevations).
Medication Management
Medication management should be provided in conjunc-
tion with pharmacotherapy. Medication management services
focus on the appropriateness, effectiveness, and safety of
medications for a given patient. These services include moni-
toring and evaluating the patient’s response to medication/C15Adopted by the ASAM Board of Directors December 18, 2019 NPG for the Treatment of Opioid Use Disorder
/C2232020 American Society of Addiction Medicine 31
Copyright © 2020 American Society of Addiction Medicine. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.(including ongoing misuse of substances) and medication
adherence; dose titration as clinically indicated; education to
ensure the patient understands their treatment plan, how to take
their medications, and the importance of adherence; and pro-
vision of recommendations for other treatment and recovery
support services as indicated. These services are intended to
promote ongoing engagement in treatment, optimize the
patient’s medication response, and prevent relapse.
While some of the components of medication manage-
ment, such as dose titration, should be performed by the
prescriber, other components can be performed by other
members of the patient’s care team, either within the program
or through referral. Medication management services as well
as other services designed to improve treatment outcomes and
prevent relapse should be coordinated across all providers
involved in the patient’s care.
PDMP Monitoring
Accessing PDMP data is advisable to check for other
medications that the patient may be receiving. Due to varia-
tion in state PDMP laws, clinicians are encouraged to be
familiar with the legal requirements associated with PDMPs
and prescribing of controlled substances in their state. In
addition, drug testing in combination with a patient’s self-
reported information about substance use is recommended as
a monitoring tool during treatment. Note that medications
dispensed through an OTP or other treatment program subject
to the substance use disorder confidentiality regulations (42
CFR Part 2) and are typically not captured in state PDMPs.
Length of Treatment
While there is limited research on optimal length of
addiction treatment, available research generally suggests that
longer duration of treatment results in better outcomes. The
National Institute on Drug Abuse’s Principles of Drug Addiction
Treatment notes that individuals progress through addiction
treatment at various rates and positive outcomes are contingent
on adequate treatment duration.75Generally, treatment partici-
pation for less than 90 days is of limited effectiveness, and
treatment lasting significantly longer is associated with more
positive long-term outcomes. For patients treated with metha-
done, 12 months is considered the minimum, and some patients
will continue to benefit from this treatment for many years.75
Summary of Recommendations – Treatment
Options
1.
 All FDA approved medications for
the treatment of opioid use disorder should be available to
all patients. Clinicians should consider the patient’s
preferences, past treatment history, current state of ill-
ness, and treatment setting when deciding between the
use of methadone, buprenorphine, and naltrexone.
2.
 There is no recommended time limit for
pharmacological treatment.
3.
 Patients’ psychosocial needs
should be assessed, and patients should be offered or
referred to psychosocial treatment based on their indi-
vidual needs. However, a patient’s decision to decline
psychosocial treatment or the absence of availablepsychosocial treatment should not preclude or delay phar-
macotherapy, with appropriate medication management.
Motivational interviewing or enhancement can be used to
encourage patients to engage in psychosocial treatment
services appropriate for addressing individual needs.
4.
 The venue in which treatment is
provided should be carefully considered. Methadone can
only be provided in opioid treatment programs (OTPs) and
acute care settings (under limited circumstances). Bupre-
norphine can be prescribed by waivered clinicians in any
setting, including OTPs and office based opioid treatment
(OBOT) in accordance with the Federal law (21 CFR
§1301.28). Naltrexone can be prescribed in any setting
by any clinician with the authority to prescribe medication.
Clinicians should consider a patient’s psychosocial situa-
tion, co-occurring disorders, and risk of diversion when
determining which treatment setting is most appropriate
(see The ASAM Criteria for additional guidance).1
5.
 Patients with active co-occurring
alcohol use disorder or sedative, hypnotic, or anxiolytic
use disorder (or who are in treatment for a substance use
disorder involving use of alcohol or other sedative drugs,
including benzodiazepines or benzodiazepine receptor ago-
nists) may need a more intensive level of care than can be
provided in an office-based setting. Persons who are regu-
larly using alcohol or other sedatives, but do not meet the
criteria for diagnosis of a specific substance use disorder
related to that class of drugs, should be carefully monitored.
6.
 The prescribing of benzodiaze-
pines or other sedative-hypnotics should be used with
caution in patients who are prescribed methadone or
buprenorphine for the treatment of an opioid use disorder.
While the combined use of these drugs increases the risk
of serious side effects, the harm caused by untreated
opioid use disorder can outweigh these risks. A risk-
benefit analysis should be conducted when deciding
whether to co-prescribe these medications.
7. Methadone is recommended for patients who may benefit
from daily dosing and supervision in an OTP, or for
patients for whom buprenorphine for the treatment of
opioid use disorder has been used unsuccessfully in an
OTP or OBOT setting.
8.
 Opioid dosing guidelines developed for chronic
pain, expressed in morphine milligram equivalents
(MME), are not applicable to medications for the treat-
ment of opioid use disorders.
9.
 Oral naltrexone for the treatment of
opioid use disorder is often adversely affected by poor
medication adherence and should not be used except under
very limited circumstances. Clin icians should reserve its use
for patients who would be able to comply with special
techniques to enhance their adherence, for example, observed
dosing. Extended-release injectable naltrexone reduces, but
does not eliminate, issues with medication adherence.
10.
 The Prescription Drug Monitoring
Program (PDMP) should be checked regularly for
the purpose of confirming medication adherence and
to monitor for the prescribing of other controlled sub-
stances.White et el. /C15Adopted by the ASAM Board of Directors December 18, 2019
32 /C2232020 American Society of Addiction Medicine
Copyright © 2020 American Society of Addiction Medicine. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.11.
 Naloxone, for the reversal of opioid overdose,
should be provided to patients being treated for, or with a
history of, opioid use disorder. Patients and family mem-
bers/significant others should be trained in the use of
naloxone in overdose.
Areas for Further Research
1. Further research is needed to compare the advantages
of agonists and antagonists in the treatment of opioid
use disorder. Whereas methadone, buprenorphine, and
extended-release injectable naltrexone are all superior to
no treatment in opioid use disorder, less is known about
their relative advantages.
2. Further research is needed to compare extended-release for-
mulations in treatment of opio id use disorder (extended-
release naltrexone vs extended-release buprenorphine).
3. Further research is needed on the comparative effective-
ness of various health care settings and delivery systems
(e.g., integrated delivery systems, health maintenance
organizations, preferred provider organizations, point of
service care etc.) for treatment of opioid use disorder.
4. Across a variety of sub-populations, further research is
needed to better understand and characterize the effective-
ness of and adherence to the different pharmacotherapy
options to treat opioid use disorder.
PART 3: TREATING OPIOID WITHDRAWAL
Background
Opioid withdrawal syndrome refers to the wide range of
symptoms that occur after stopping or dramatically reducing
the dose of opioid drugs after heavy and prolonged use. For
short-acting opioids such as heroin and oxycodone, symptoms
usually emerge within 12 hours of the last opioid use, peak
within 24–48 hours, and diminish over 3–5 days. For long-
acting opioids such as methadone, withdrawal symptoms
generally emerge within 30 hours of the last methadone
exposure and may last up to 10 days. Opioid withdrawal
syndrome is rarely life-threatening, but deaths have been
reported.76However, abrupt discontinuation of opioids is
not recommended because it may precipitate withdrawal, lead
to strong cravings, and result in relapse to drug use.
Symptoms of opioid withdrawal may include any of the
following:
1. Muscle aches 8. Insomnia
2. Increased tearing 9. Sweating
3. Runny nose 10. Yawning
4. Dilated pupils 11. Abdominal cramping
5. Piloerection 12. Nausea
6. Agitation 13. V omiting
7. Anxiety 14. Diarrhea
Opioid withdrawal generally results from the cessation
or a dramatic reduction in the dose of opioids, which is
referred to as spontaneous withdrawal. Opioid withdrawal
can also be precipitated when a patient who is physically
dependent on opioids is administered an opioid antagonist
such as naloxone or naltrexone, or a partial opioid agonist
such as buprenorphine. Signs and symptoms of precipitatedwithdrawal are similar to those of spontaneous withdrawal,
but the time course is different, and symptoms may be much
more severe. Review of postmarketing cases of precipitated
opioid withdrawal in association with treatment with naltrex-
one has identified cases with symptoms of withdrawal severe
enough to require hospital admission, and in some cases,
management in an intensive care unit.77,78
The timing of maximal precipitated withdrawal usually
occurs in the following scenarios:
1. Within 1 minute for intravenously administered naloxone.
2. Several minutes after IM naloxone.
3. Up to 90 minutes after sublingual buprenorphine.
4. Up to several hours after extended-release injectable nal-
trexone79
The duration of withdrawal depends on the half-life and
dose of the partial agonist or antagonist. Naloxone-precipitated
withdrawal typically lasts for 30–60 minutes, whereas bupre-
norphine or naltrexone-precipitated withdrawal may last for
several days. The ability to accurately assess patients for opioid
dependence is important to avoid precipitated withdrawal when
introducing antagonists and partial agonists medications.
Withdrawal management can make withdrawal from
opioids more comfortable. Given the high rate of relapse,
opioid withdrawal management on its own, without ongoing
pharmacotherapy, is not an effective treatment for opioid use
disorder and is not recommended.80If withdrawal manage-
ment alone, or withdrawal management followed by psycho-
social treatment alone, is proposed the patient should be
informed of the high risks of subsequent relapse, and the
increased risk for overdose and overdose death, as compared
to ongoing treatment with opioid agonists. Withdrawal man-
agement is not necessary or recommended for patients being
referred for treatment with methadone or buprenorphine.
Assessment of Patients for Opioid Withdrawal
Assessment of a patient undergoing opioid withdrawal
should include a thorough medical history and physical
examination focusing on signs and symptoms associated with
opioid withdrawal. There are various scales available to assess
opioid withdrawal. Objective signs, when present, are more
reliable, but subjective withdrawal features can also be sensi-
tive measures of opioid withdrawal. These scales may be used
to measure opioid withdrawal symptoms during the initial
assessment to make the diagnosis of opioid withdrawal. In
addition, clinicians can assess the effectiveness of withdrawal
management by repeating these scales intermittently as they
treat withdrawal symptoms.
/C15Objective Opioid Withdrawal Scale (OOWS) is an objective
measure in which the clinician checks for 13 signs of opioid
withdrawal (e.g., yawning, perspiration).40
/C15Clinical Opioid Withdrawal Scale (COWS) is a clinical
assessment for 11 medical signs and symptoms of opioid
withdrawal (e.g., gastrointestinal distress).81
/C15Subjective Opioid Withdrawal Scale (SOWS) is a measure
of 16 subjective symptoms of withdrawal, in which the
patient rates their experience on a 5-point scale (e.g., I feel
restless).40/C15Adopted by the ASAM Board of Directors December 18, 2019 NPG for the Treatment of Opioid Use Disorder
/C2232020 American Society of Addiction Medicine 33
Copyright © 2020 American Society of Addiction Medicine. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited./C15The Clinical Institute Narcotic Assessment (CINA) scale is
a mix of subjective and objective measures assessing 11
common signs and symptoms of opioid withdrawal.41
Opioid withdrawal management may occur in either
inpatient or outpatient settings. There is a lack of evidence to
determine the relative safety of inpatient versus outpatient
withdrawal management. Inpatient withdrawal management
has higher rates of completion compared to outpatient with-
drawal management; however, there is no demonstrable dif-
ference in relapse following inpatient versus outpatient
withdrawal management.82For patients with significant or
unstable physical or mental health issues, treatment in an
inpatient setting with monitored withdrawal may be preferred.
Medications in Opioid Withdrawal
For the management of opioid withdrawal, two main
strategies have evolved. The first involves the provision of
gradually tapering doses of opioid agonists, typically metha-
done or buprenorphine. The other strategy involves the use of
alpha-2 adrenergic agonists (FDA-approved lofexidine, and
off-label use of clonidine) along with other non-narcotic
medications to reduce withdrawal symptoms. Both strategies
have advantages and disadvantages, and both are superior to
placebo with respect to withdrawal severity and treatment
completion. Methadone and buprenorphine are generally
more effective in reducing the symptoms of opioid with-
drawal, in retaining patients in withdrawal management,
and in supporting the completion of withdrawal management.
With respect to withdrawal severity, recent evidence
from systematic reviews suggests that methadone tapers or
using alpha-2 adrenergic agonists for opioid withdrawal
results in similar severity of withdrawal symptoms.83Bupre-
norphine tapers, on the other hand, may be more effective than
alpha-2-adrenergic agonists in terms of withdrawal severity,
duration, and treatment completion.84However, if treatment
with naltrexone is planned, managing withdrawal with alpha-
2-adrenergic agonists may enable a more rapid initiation.
Buprenorphine and methadone appear to be similarly effec-
tive although data are limited.84
Withdrawal Management with Opioid Agonists
Methadone and buprenorphine are both recommended
for management of opioid withdrawal and while comparative
evidence remains limited, they appear to have comparable
results in terms of reducing withdrawal severity and improv-
ing treatment retention and opioid abstinence. Withdrawal
management with methadone must be done in an OTP or
inpatient setting. As noted above, opioid withdrawal manage-
ment on its own, without ongoing pharmacotherapy, is not a
treatment method for opioid use disorder and is not recom-
mended. Ongoing maintenance medication, in combination
with psychosocial treatment appropriate for the patient’s
needs, is the standard of care for treating opioid use disorder.
If the decision is made to taper, patients should be advised
about the risk of relapse and other safety concerns, including
increased risk of overdose and overdose death. Methadone
tapers generally start with doses in the range of 20–30 mg per
day and are completed in 6–10 days.Buprenorphine withdrawal management can be done
either in an outpatient or an inpatient setting. None of the
available forms of buprenorphine are specifically FDA-
approved for withdrawal management, but they may be used
for this purpose. None of the products have shown superiority
over another for this purpose. In the remainder of this section,
the term buprenorphine refers to the monotherapy and
combination formulations.
Buprenorphine is a partial mu-opioid receptor agonist
with a higher affinity for the mu-receptor than most full agonists
such as heroin and oxycodone. Therefore, it is important that
buprenorphine not be started until a patient is exhibiting
objective signs of opioid withdrawal to avoid precipitated
withdrawal. Opioid withdrawal usually occurs up to 12–
18 hours after the last dose of a short-acting agonist such as
heroin or oxycodone, and up to 24–48 hours after the last dose
of a long-acting agonist such as methadone. Providers could
consider sooner dosing of buprenorphine in an inpatient setting
where the patient can be closely monitored.
With the increasing prevalence of fentanyl, concerns
have been raised about whether the protocol for initiation onto
buprenorphine should be modified for patients regularly using
this or other high potency opioids. Fentanyl is short acting but
has a long half-life (8-10 hours) and a relatively high affinity for
them-opioid receptor.80Some clinicians have recommended
waiting until patients are in at least moderate withdrawal
(COWS score of 13 or higher) before initiating buprenorphine.
However, there is little existing evidence addressing this issue.
Withdrawal management with buprenorphine should
start with an initial dose of 2-4 mg, titrated up as needed to
suppress withdrawal (generally 4–16 mg per day). As noted
above, opioid withdrawal management on its own, without
ongoing pharmacotherapy, is not a treatment method for
opioid use disorder and is not recommended. If the decision
is made to taper, patients should be advised about the risk of
relapse and other safety concerns, including increased risk of
overdose and overdose death. Insufficient evidence is avail-
able on the relative effectiveness of different rates of tapering
the buprenorphine dose. The duration of the tapering schedule
can be as brief as 3–5 days or over 30 days. Studies examining
the relative efficacy of long versus short-duration tapers are
not conclusive, and the Guideline Committee was unable to
reach a consensus on this issue. One trial did find that longer
courses of buprenorphine with gradual tapering were superior
to rapid tapering for withdrawal.65Clinicians should be
guided by patient response in determining the optimum
duration of the taper.
Withdrawal Management with Alpha-2
Adrenergic Agonists
Because opioid withdrawal results largely from over-
activity of the brain’s noradrenergic system, alpha-2 adrener-
gic agonists have a long history of off-label use for the
treatment of opioid withdrawal in the U.S. In May 2018,
the FDA approved lofexidine for the mitigation of symptoms
associated with abrupt withdrawal from opioids. Lofexidine is
administered orally typically at a dose of three 0.18-mg tablets
4 times daily and can be continued for up to 14 days with
dosing guided by symptoms. Lofexidine treatment should beWhite et el. /C15Adopted by the ASAM Board of Directors December 18, 2019
34 /C2232020 American Society of Addiction Medicine
Copyright © 2020 American Society of Addiction Medicine. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.discontinued with a gradual dose reduction over 2 to 4 days.
Clonidine is generally used at doses of 0.1–0.3 mg every 6–
8 hours, with a maximum dose of 1.2 mg daily. Its hypotensive
effects often limit the amount that can be used.
Clonidine is often combined with other non-narcotic
medications targeting specific opioid withdrawal symptoms
such as benzodiazepines for anxiety, loperamide or bismuth-
salycilate for diarrhea, acetaminophen or nonsteroidal anti-
inflammatory medications (NSAIDs) for pain, various med-
ications for insomnia, and ondansetron for nausea. Alpha-2
adrenergic agonists are more effective than placebo in reduc-
ing severe withdrawal and in improving rates of treatment
retention and completion. These medications can also be used
concurrently with medications used to treat opioid use disor-
der. Alpha-2 adrenergic agonists can be used to treat with-
drawal when patients taper off buprenorphine or methadone,
and they can be used in preparation for initiation of extended-
release naltrexone.83
Comparative data are limited but lofexidine and cloni-
dine appear to be similarly effective in the treatment of opioid
withdrawal with hypotension occurring less frequently with
lofexidine.83Lofexidine should therefore be the preferred
choice for withdrawal management in an outpatient setting
where monitoring of blood pressure and management of
hypotension is more difficult. Other agents in the same
pharmacological family as clonidine, such as guanfacine
(available in the U.S.) can also be used off-label as safe
and effective agents in the management of opioid withdrawal.
Anesthesia-Assisted Withdrawal Management
Anesthesia-assisted opioid detoxification or UROD uses
large doses of naloxone to precipitate acute opioid withdrawal
in the patient who is under general anesthesia. Patients are
anesthetized, then intubated and mechanically ventilated. A
diuretic is used to enhance excretion of the opioid. Patients
experience mild withdrawal symptoms for about 6 days after
awakening from anesthesia, compared with similar withdrawal
symptoms on a 20-day methadone taper.85,86
ASAM recommends against the use of UROD in the
treatment of opioid withdrawal and stated these same recom-
mendations in a policy statement. ASAM’s position is in
accordance with other guidelines. Serious complications
including cardiac arrest and death have been reported with
anesthesia-assisted withdrawal management.87The Centers
for Disease Control and Prevention issued a warning in 2013
about severe adverse events including death from anesthesia-
assisted withdrawal management.88Furthermore, a system-
atic review of five randomized trials concluded that the lack of
benefit, potential serious harms, and costs of heavy sedation
or anesthesia do not support its use.89
Summary of Recommendations – Treating Opioid
Withdrawal
1.
 Using methadone or buprenorphine
for opioid withdrawal management is recommended over
abrupt cessation of opioids. Abrupt cessation of opioids
may lead to strong cravings, and/or acute withdrawal
syndrome which can put the patient at risk for relapse,
overdose, and overdose death.2.
 Opioid withdrawal management
(i.e. detoxification) on its own, without ongoing treatment
for opioid use disorder, is not a treatment method for opioid
use disorder and is not recommended. Patients should be
advised about the risk of relapse and other safety concerns,
including increased risk of overdose and overdose death.
Ongoing maintenance medication, in combination with
psychosocial treatment appropriate for the patient’s needs,
is the standard of care for treating opioid use disorder.
3.
 Assessment of a patient undergoing
opioid withdrawal management should include a thorough
medical history and physical examination, focusing on
signs and symptoms associated with opioid withdrawal.
4.
 By regulation, opioid withdrawal
management with methadone must be done in an OTP or
an acute care setting (under limited circumstances). For
patients withdrawing from short acting opioids the initial
dose should typically be 20-30 mg per day and the patient
may be tapered off in approximately 6-10 days.
5.
 Opioid withdrawal management
with buprenorphine should not be initiated until there
are objective signs of opioid withdrawal. (See Part 3 for
more information on the timing of initiating buprenor-
phine.) Once signs of withdrawal have been objectively
confirmed, a dose of buprenorphine sufficient to suppress
withdrawal symptoms is given (an initial dose of 2-4 mg
titrated up as needed to suppress withdrawal symptoms).
6.
 Alpha-2 adrenergic agonists (e.g.,
FDA-approved lofexidine and off-label clonidine) are safe
and effective for management of opioid withdrawal. How-
ever, methadone and buprenorphine are more effective in
reducing the symptoms of opioid withdrawal, in retaining
patients in withdrawal management, and in supporting the
completion of withdrawal management.
7. Opioid withdrawal management using ultra-rapid opioid
detoxification (UROD) is not recommended due to high
risk for adverse events or death. Naltrexone-facilitated
opioid withdrawal management can be safe and effective
but should be used only by clinicians experienced with this
clinical method, and in cases in which anesthesia or
conscious sedation are not employed.
Areas for Further Research
1. Further study is needed on methods to accelerate the
withdrawal process and facilitate the introduction of
antagonists. Recently, researchers have begun to investi-
gate the use of combinations of buprenorphine and low
doses of oral naltrexone to rapidly detoxify patients and
facilitate the accelerated introduction of extended-release
injectable naltrexone.4Although these techniques seem
promising, more research is needed before these can be
accepted as standard practice. Similarly, there are insuffi-
cient data to determine whether opioid antagonists (nal-
trexone, naloxone or both) in combination with alpha-2
adrenergic agonists (lofexidine and clonidine) reduce
withdrawal duration or increase rates of retention in
ongoing treatment with naltrexone.84
2. Further research is needed to make recommendations on
the optimal duration of a buprenorphine taper, and to/C15Adopted by the ASAM Board of Directors December 18, 2019 NPG for the Treatment of Opioid Use Disorder
/C2232020 American Society of Addiction Medicine 35
Copyright © 2020 American Society of Addiction Medicine. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.compare the effectiveness of short versus long tapers with
buprenorphine withdrawal management.
3. Further research is needed to evaluate the safety of inpa-
tient as compared to outpatient withdrawal management.
4. Further research is needed to address whether the protocol
for buprenorphine initiation should be modified for patients
regularly using fentanyl and other high potency opioids.
PART 4: METHADONE
Background
Methadone, a slow-acting opioid agonist, is an effective
treatment for opioid withdrawal management and the treat-
ment of opioid use disorder. Methadone is taken orally so that
it reaches the brain slowly, dampening the rewarding effect
that can occur with other routes of administration while
preventing withdrawal symptoms. Methadone has been used
since the 1960 s to treat heroin addiction and remains an
effective treatment option. Many studies have demonstrated
its superiority to medication-free approaches.36In the United
States, Methadone is only available through approved OTPs,
where it is dispensed to patients on a daily or almost daily
basis in the initial stages of treatment, and in acute care
settings (under limited circumstances). Federal and state laws
allow take-home doses for patients who have demonstrated
treatment progress and are judged to be at low risk for
diversion, and for whom the therapeutic benefits of take-
home doses outweigh the risks.
PATIENT SELECTION AND TREATMENT GOALS
Treatment with methadone at an OTP is recommended
for patients who have opioid use disorder, are able to give
informed consent, and have no specific contraindications for
this treatment. Treatment with methadone has the following
four goals:
1. suppress opioid withdrawal;
2. block the effects of illicit opioids;
3. reduce opioid craving and stop or reduce the use of illicit
opioids;
4. promote and facilitate patient engagement in recovery-
oriented activities including psychosocial interventions.
Precautions
Arrhythmias
Patients should be informed of the potential risk of
arrhythmia when they are dispensed methadone. It is recom-
mended to get a history of structural heart disease, arrhythmia,
or syncope. In addition, the clinician should assess the patient
for other risk factors for QT-interval prolongation. An elec-
trocardiogram (ECG) should be conducted for patients with
significant risk factors including any prior ECG demonstrat-
ing a QTc >450 milliseconds, or a history suggestive of prior
ventricular arrhythmia. ECG should also be considered when
other risk factors for QT interval prolongation are present
including when high doses of methadone are being employed,
patient or family history of cardiac risk factors, abnormal liver
enzymes, electrolyte abnormalities, or the patient is takingmedications known to prolong the QT interval. While there
are no clear data on the threshold dose of methadone that
confers risk for QT interval prolongation, the consensus of the
committee is that ECG should be considered for patients
receiving over 120 mg per day.90However, there is no
research on the use of ECG data for improving patient out-
comes. See Adverse Effect section below and ‘‘Part 2: Treat-
ment Options: Contraindications and Precautions’’ for
additional information.91
COURSE OF TREATMENT
Initiation
The previous version of these guidelines used the term
induction instead of initiation. While the meaning is the same
in this context, the guideline committee noted that this
language did not align with the terminology used for other
medical conditions and can make the process sound more
difficult and complex than it is.
Initial dosing of methadone depends on the level of
physical dependence. The recommended initial dose ranges
from 10 to 30 mg, with reassessment as clinically indicated,
typically in 2–4 hours when peak levels have been reached.92
Reassessment in this time frame may not always be feasible,
for example, when treatment initiation begins late in the day.
In these cases, it may be more practical to reassess first thing
in the morning. Timing of reassessment should not be a barrier
to initiation of methadone.
Given the risk of overdose in the first 2 weeks, tolerance
is an important safety consideration. Federal law mandates
that the initial dose cannot exceed 30 mg and the total dosage
on the first day cannot exceed 40 mg.42For individuals with
no or low opioid tolerance (e.g. patients transitioning from
naltrexone, patients re-entering the community after residen-
tial treatment or incarceration [with no agonist treatment],
patients re-initiating methadone after relapse), use a lower-
than-usual dose (2.5 to 10 mg). Increase the dose slowly and
with careful monitoring for all patients, with particular atten-
tion to patients who have not used opioids for 5 or more days,
do not use opioids daily, or use less potent opioids (e.g.,
codeine).93Avoid using automated dosing increases to protect
against the risk of overdose. Particular caution should be
exhibited with patients with active cardiac disease or who
have been prescribed other medications associated with QT
interval prolongation.
Titration
Methadone has a long half-life and care must be taken to
avoid too rapid dose increases during the first 1–3 weeks of
treatment to avoid increasing the dose before the full effect of
the last dose has been realized. Doses do not correlate well
with blood levels. Dosing should be based on the patient’s
response and can vary widely between patients. Methadone
should generally not be increased every day but rather
increased no more than 10 mg approximately every 5 days
based on the patient’s symptoms of opioid withdrawal or
sedation. For example, 10 mg increases at intervals of 5 days
or 5 mg increases at intervals of 2-3 days as symptoms persist.
Trough and peak plasma levels of methadone (or methadoneWhite et el. /C15Adopted by the ASAM Board of Directors December 18, 2019
36 /C2232020 American Society of Addiction Medicine
Copyright © 2020 American Society of Addiction Medicine. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.blood levels) may be used in addition to clinical evaluation to
assess the safety and adequacy of a patient’s dose, particularly
in patients who seem to be rapid metabolizers and may need a
split dose.94–98A relatively low dose of methadone (e.g.,
<30 mg per day) can lessen acute withdrawal but is often not
effective in suppressing craving. Patients should be educated
to understand that the full benefits of methadone treatment
take time and that it is common to feel unwell during the first
few days of methadone titration.
Maintenance
Though a few patients respond to a maintenance dose of
30–60 mg per day, most patients fare better if their initial dose
is gradually raised to a maintenance level of 60–120 mg per
day, which typically creates sufficient tolerance to minimize a
euphoric response if patients self-administer additional
opioids. Multiple randomized trials found that patients have
better outcomes, including retention in treatment, with higher
doses (80–100 mg per day) than lower doses.99,100Though
not well studied, doses above 120 mg per day are being used
with some patients as blockade of opioid effects is becoming
increasingly more difficult due to the increased availability of
high potency opioids including fentanyl and other synthetic
opioids.92
Adverse Effects
Higher methadone doses may be associated with
increased risk of adverse effects, including prolongation of
the QT interval and arrhythmias (torsades des pointes), which
in some cases have been fatal (see Precautions section
above).101The FDA issued a safety alert for methadone
regarding these cardiac events.102Clinicians, in consultation
with patients, may need to consider the relative risk of adverse
events due to QT prolongation with methadone as compared
to the risk of morbidity and mortality of an untreated opioid
use disorder.103Changing to buprenorphine or naltrexone
maintenance should be considered when risks of QT pro-
longation are high as these medications do not seem to
significantly prolong the QT interval. While there is limited
evidence on effective screening strategies for preventing
cardiac morbidity and mortality in patients treated with
methadone, the Guideline Committee concurs with the
recommendations from SAMHSA’s TIP 63 which recom-
mends that OTPs develop a cardiac risk management plan
(Figure A).91,104
Figure A: Cardiac Risk Management Plan from SAMHSA’s TIP 6391
‘‘OTPs should consider the following elements in crafting a cardiac risk
management plan:
1. An intake assessment of risk factors, which can include:
a. Family history of sudden cardiac death, arrhythmia, myocardial
infarction, heart failure, prolonged QTc interval, or unexplained
syncope.
b. Patient history of arrhythmia, myocardial infarction, heart failure,
prolonged QTc interval, unexplained syncope, palpitations, or
seizures.
c. Current use of medications that may increase QTc interval (for a
complete list, see www.crediblemeds.org/pdftemp/pdf /
CompositeList.pdf; register for free for the most current list).
d. Patient history of use of cocaine and methamphetamines (which
can prolong the QTc interval).
e. Electrolyte assessment (for hypokalemia or hypomagnesemia).2. A risk stratification plan, which can include the following:
a. Conduct an ECG for patients with significant risk factors at
admission; repeat within 30 days. Repeat once a year and if
the patient is treated with more than 120 mg of methadone
per day.
b. Discuss risks and benefits of methadone with patients with QTc
intervals between 450 and 500 milliseconds. Adjust modifiable
risk factors to reduce their risk.
c. Do not start methadone treatment for patients with known QTc
intervals above 500 milliseconds. If such an interval is discovered
during treatment, have a risk/ benefit discussion. Strongly
consider lowering the methadone dose, changing concurrent
medications that prolong the QTc interval, eliminating other risk
factors, and, if necessary, switching to buprenorphine. Include
follow-up ECG monitoring.
d. Consider providing routine universal ECG screening if feasible,
although there is insufficient evidence to formally recommend
doing so.’’
Psychosocial Treatment
Because opioid addiction is a chronic relapsing disease,
strategies specifically directed at relapse prevention are an
important part of comprehensive treatment and can include
counseling and/or other psychosocial treatments. Patients’
psychosocial needs should be assessed, and patients should
be offered or referred to psychosocial treatment based on their
individual needs. However, there may be instances when
pharmacotherapy alone results in positive outcomes. A
patient’s decision to decline psychosocial treatment or the
absence of available psychosocial treatment should not pre-
clude or delay pharmacological treatment of opioid use
disorder, with appropriate medication management. Motiva-
tional interviewing or enhancement can be used to encourage
patients to engage in psychosocial treatment services appro-
priate for addressing their individual needs.
Family involvement in treatment can provide strong
support for patient recovery; and family members may also
benefit. The concept of family should be expanded to include
members of the patient’s social network (as defined by the
patient), including significant others, close friends, clergy,
employers, and case managers.
Monitoring Treatment
Federal and state-approved OTPs dispense and supervise
administration of methadone. Treatment monitoring for metha-
done is subject to federal regulations (42 CFR Part 8). These
regulations include requirements for medication administration,
dispensing and use, as well as diversion control and drug testing.
Patients are seen daily at the beginning of their treat-
ment for supervised dosing. Once patients are stabilized, take
home doses of methadone may be dispensed based on criteria
defined in the regulations. The stability of a patient is deter-
mined by the medical director based on several indicators
which may include the absence of problematic alcohol and
illicit drug use, participation in psychosocial treatment and
other recovery-based activities, and productive occupational
and social functioning. The regulations allow stable patients
to be seen less frequently (once per week after six months in
treatment and once every two weeks after a year in treatment).
Treatment should include relapse monitoring with fre-
quent testing for alcohol and other relevant psychoactive/C15Adopted by the ASAM Board of Directors December 18, 2019 NPG for the Treatment of Opioid Use Disorder
/C2232020 American Society of Addiction Medicine 37
Copyright © 2020 American Society of Addiction Medicine. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.substances. Testing for methadone metabolites (e.g., EDDP)
is recommended to ensure adherence and detect possible diver-
sion.
Accessing PDMP data is advisable to check for other
medications that the patient may be receiving. Due to the
variation in state PDMP laws, clinicians are encouraged to be
familiar with the legal requirements associated with PDMPs
and prescribing of controlled substances in their state. PDMP
checks in combination with drug testing and a patient’s self-
reported information is recommended for monitoring sub-
stance use during treatment (See The ASAM Appropriate Use
of Drug Testing in Clinical Addiction Medicine guidance
document).14
Patients who discontinue agonist therapy should be made
aware of the risks associated with an opioid overdose, and
especially the increased risk of overdose death. Patients should
also be made aware of other risks associated with intravenous drug
use including the risk of infectio ns (HIV, Hepatitis C, endocarditis,
sepsis, etc.). Treatment alternat ives including buprenorphine (see
Part 5) and naltrexone (see Part 6), as well as opioid overdose
prevention with naloxone (see part 13), should be discussed with
any patient choosing to discontinue treatment.
Length of Treatment
There is no recommended time limit for treatment with
methadone. Clinicians should not encourage patients to dis-
continue medication based on a pre-determined duration of
treatment. While the optimal duration of treatment with
methadone has not been established, it is known that relapse
rates are high for most patients who drop out; thus, long-term
treatment is often needed. While the research is limited,
available research generally suggests that at longer duration
of treatment result in better outcomes. The National Institute
on Drug Abuse’s Principles of Drug Addiction treatment notes
that individuals progress through addiction Treatment at
various rates and positive outcomes are contingent on ade-
quate treatment duration.74Generally, treatment participation
for less than 90 days is of limited effectiveness, and treatment
lasting significantly longer is associated with more positive
long-term outcomes. For patients treated with methadone,
12 months is considered the minimum, and some patients will
continue to benefit from this treatment for many years.
Treatment duration depends on the response of the
individual patient and is best determined by collaborative
decision making between the clinician and the patient. Treat-
ment should be reinstituted immediately for most patients
who were previously taking methadone and have relapsed or
are at risk for relapse.
TRANSITIONING BETWEEN TREATMENT
MEDICATIONS
Transitioning from methadone to other opioid use dis-
order treatment medications may be appropriate in the fol-
lowing cases:
1. patient experiences intolerable methadone side effects;
2. patient has not been successful in attaining or maintaining
their treatment goals through the initially chosen pharmaco-
therapy3. patient wants to change and is a candidate for the
alternative treatment.
Medication transitions should be planned, considered,
and monitored. Particular care should be taken in reducing
methadone dosing before transfer to avoid precipitating a
relapse. If the patient becomes unstable and appears at risk for
relapse during the transfer of medications, reinstating metha-
done may be the best option.
Transitioning to Buprenorphine
Patients on low doses of methadone (30–40 mg per day
or less) generally tolerate the transition to buprenorphine with
minimal discomfort; whereas patients on higher doses of
methadone may find that transitioning causes significant
discomfort. Patients should be closely monitored during
such a transition because there is a risk that stable methadone
patients may become unstable when changing to buprenor-
phine.
To minimize the risk of precipitated withdrawal, it is
recommended that clinicians use careful initial dosing fol-
l o w e db yr a p i dt i t r a t i o nu pt oa n appropriate maintenance
dose. Patients should be expe riencing mild to moderate
opioid withdrawal before the t ransition. This would typically
occur up to 24–48 hours after the last dose of methadone,
after a sufficient time has elapsed for there to be minimal risk
that the first dose of buprenorphine will precipitate
significant withdrawal.
During office-based initiation of buprenorphine, the
u s eo ft h eC O W Sc a nb eh e l p f u li n determining if patients are
experiencing mild to moderate withdrawal.80AC O W Ss c o r e
of 11–12 or more is generally indicative of sufficient with-
drawal to allow a safe and comfo rtable initiation onto bupre-
norphine. For home-based initiation, clinicians should
discuss with patients the importance of waiting for physical
symptoms of opioid withdrawal (e.g. pupil dilation, goose
bumps, gastrointestinal discom fort, etc.) before taking their
first dose of buprenorphine to prevent precipitated with-
drawal.
An initial dose of 2–4 mg of buprenorphine should be
given. If withdrawal symptoms improve, the patient can be
given additional 2–8 mg doses as needed to suppress with-
drawal symptoms. The prescribing doctor should contact the
patient later in the day to assess the response to dosing. The
likelihood of precipitating withdrawal on commencing
buprenorphine is reduced as the time interval between the
last methadone dose and the f irst buprenorphine dose
increases.
Transitioning to Naltrexone
Patients transitioning from methadone to naltrexone
need to be completely withdrawn from methadone and other
opioids before they can receive naltrexone. This may take up
to 14 days, but can typically be achieved in 7 days.64A
naloxone challenge (administration of 0.4–0.8 mg naloxone
and observation for precipitated withdrawal) may be useful
before initiating treatment with naltrexone to document the
absence of physiological dependence and to minimize the risk
for precipitated withdrawal (see Glossary for more on nalox-
one challenge).White et el. /C15Adopted by the ASAM Board of Directors December 18, 2019
38 /C2232020 American Society of Addiction Medicine
Copyright © 2020 American Society of Addiction Medicine. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.Summary of Recommendations – Methadone
1.
 Methadone is a recommended
treatment for patients with opioid use disorder, who
are able to give informed consent and have no specific
contraindication for this treatment.
2.
 The recommended initial dose of
methadone ranges from 10 to 30 mg, with reassessment
as clinically indicated (typically in 2 to 4 hours). Use a
lower-than-usual initial dose (2.5 to 10 mg) in individuals
with no or low opioid tolerance.
3.
 Following initial withdrawal sta-
bilization, the usual daily dose of methadone ranges from
60 to 120 mg. Some patients may respond to lower doses
and some may need higher doses. Methadone titration
should be individualized based on careful assessment of
the patient’s response and generally should not be
increased every day. Typically, methadone can be
increased by no more than 10 mg approximately every
5 days based on the patient’s symptoms of opioid with-
drawal or sedation.
4. The administration of methadone should be monitored
because unsupervised administration can lead to misuse
and diversion. OTP regulations require monitored medi-
cation administration until the patient’s clinical response
and behavior demonstrates that prescribing non-moni-
tored doses is appropriate.
5.
 Patients’ psychosocial needs
should be assessed, and patients should be offered or
referred to psychosocial treatment based on their indi-
vidual needs, in conjunction with methadone in the
treatment of opioid use disorder. However, a patient’s
decision to decline psychosocial treatment or the absence
of available psychosocial treatment should not preclude
or delay treatment with methadone, with appropriate
medication management. Motivational interviewing or
enhancement can be used to encourage patients to engage
in psychosocial treatment services appropriate for
addressing their individual needs.
6.
 For patients who previously
received methadone for the treatment of opioid use
disorder, methadone should be reinstituted immediately
if relapse occurs or if an assessment determines that the
risk of relapse is high (unless contraindicated). Re-initi-
ation of methadone should follow the recommendations
above regarding initial dose and titration.
7.
 Strategies directed at relapse pre-
vention are an important part of addiction treatment and
should be included in any plan of care for a patient
receiving opioid use disorder treatment or ongoing mon-
itoring of the status of their disorder.
8.
 Transitioning from methadone to
another medication for the treatment of opioid use disor-
der may be appropriate if the patient experiences dan-
gerous or intolerable side effects or is not successful in
attaining or maintaining treatment goals through the use
of methadone.
9.
 Patients transitioning from meth-
adone to buprenorphine in the treatment of opioid use
disorder should ideally be on low doses of methadonebefore making the transition. Patients on low doses of
methadone (30–40 mg per day or less) generally tolerate
transition to buprenorphine with minimal discomfort,
whereas patients on higher doses of methadone may
experience significant discomfort in transitioning med-
ications.
10.
 Patients transitioning from meth-
adone to naltrexone must be completely withdrawn from
methadone and other opioids, before they can receive
naltrexone. The only exception would apply when an
experienced clinician receives consent from the patient to
embark on a plan of naltrexone-facilitated opioid
withdrawal management.
11.
 There is no recommended time
limit for pharmacological treatment with methadone.
Patients who discontinue methadone treatment should
be made aware of the risks associated with opioid
overdose, and especially the increased risk of overdose
death if they return to illicit opioid use. Treatment
alternatives including buprenorphine (see Part 5) and
naltrexone (see Part 6), as well as opioid overdose
prevention with naloxone (see part 13), should be dis-
cussed with any patient choosing to discontinue treat-
ment.
Areas for Further Research
1. Further research is needed to assess the effectiveness of
specific types of psychosocial treatment in combination
with methadone in OTP or inpatient settings. Treatment
with methadone generally includes some psychosocial
components, however, it is unclear when added psychoso-
cial treatment improves patient outcomes, and which
psychosocial treatments are beneficial to which patients.
2. Research is needed to evaluate the use of ECG in treatment
with methadone in preventing adverse cardiac events.
3. Further research is needed on how to determine the opti-
mal length of treatment with methadone for individual
patients.
4. More research is needed on outcomes following transitions
from methadone to other opioid use disorder treatment
medications. For example, to what extent do different
protocols for medication transitions affect short- and
long-term treatment outcomes.
PART 5: BUPRENORPHINE
Background
Buprenorphine is recommended for the treatment of
opioid use disorder. Buprenorphine relieves drug cravings
without producing euphoria, and with reduced risk of danger-
ous and adverse effects compared with full agonist opioids. In
addition to its pharmacological properties, an advantage of
buprenorphine is that it can be prescribed in office-based
treatment settings. The FDA approved buprenorphine in 2002,
making it the first medication eligible to be prescribed by
certified physicians through the Drug Addiction Treatment
Act of 2000 (DATA 2000).105Through DATA 2000, physi-
cians may apply for waivers to prescribe certain narcotic
schedule III, IV, or V medications, including buprenorphine,/C15Adopted by the ASAM Board of Directors December 18, 2019 NPG for the Treatment of Opioid Use Disorder
/C2232020 American Society of Addiction Medicine 39
Copyright © 2020 American Society of Addiction Medicine. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.from their office settings. This provision of the act expands
access to community-based treatment options and mitigates
the need to receive treatment through more specialized, and
often less available, OTPs. However, buprenorphine may also
be administered in an OTP setting with similar program and
administration requirements to those for methadone.
Recent legislation has further expanded the types of
practitioners who can prescribe buprenorphine for the treat-
ment of opioid use disorder. The Comprehensive Addiction
and Recovery Act (CARA) signed into law in July 2016
extended the authority to prescribe buprenorphine to qualify-
ing NPs and PAs who obtain a waiver.106The SUPPORT for
Patients and Community Act (Congress.gov) signed into law
in October 2018 further expanded buprenorphine prescribing
privileges (through October 1, 2023) to qualifying clinical
nurse specialists, certified registered nurse anesthetists, and
certified nurse midwives.107
Formulations of Buprenorphine
For this Practice Guideline , recommendations using the
term buprenorphine will refer generally to both the bupre-
norphine only (monoproduct) and the combination buprenor-
phine/naloxone (combination product) formulations. When
recommendations differ by formulation it will be noted.
This Practice Guideline generally recommends using
combination buprenorphine/naloxone for both withdrawal
management and treatment of opioid use disorder, with
special considerations for pregnant and breastfeeding women
(See Part 8: Special Populations: Pregnant Women). Combi-
nation products contain naloxone (an opioid receptor antago-
nist), which is included to discourage intravenous use of
buprenorphine. If a patient who is physically dependent on
a full agonist opioid injects buprenorphine/naloxone, the
naloxone will induce withdrawal symptoms. These with-
drawal symptoms are generally averted when buprenor-
phine/naloxone is taken as prescribed, however a small
amount of naloxone may be absorbed sublingually and can
precipitate withdrawal. Patients dependent upon methadone
or other long-acting opioid products may be more susceptible
to this effect compared to those on short-acting opioid prod-
ucts. Buprenorphine/naloxone products have not been evalu-
ated in adequate and well-controlled studies for initiation in
patients who are physically dependent on long-acting opioid
products. For this reason, buprenorphine monotherapy may be
considered in patients taking long-acting opioids. Following
initiation, the patient may then be transitioned to an extended-
release or combination formulation.68
The FDA has approved numerous buprenorphine and
buprenorphine/naloxone formul ations (see Table 1). Newly
approved formulations include ex tended-releas e injections,
an extended-release subdermal implant, and generic ver-
sions of sublingual and buccal tablets and films. These new
formulations provide a broad er array of treatment options
and their introduction onto the ma rket provides patients and
clinicians with much needed choice and flexibility when
using buprenorphine for the trea tment of opioid use disorder.
Clinicians should use the ne w injectable products as indi-
cated and be mindful of emerging evidence as it becomes
available.Bioequivalence information and charts for the various
formulations of buccal and sublingual buprenorphine and
buprenorphine/naloxone products are contained in Appendix
II. All information provided in this section is based on dosages
for the generic equivalents of buprenorphine/naloxone sublin-
gual tablets and buprenorphine monoproduct sublingual tab-
lets. Because of the possibility of slight differences in
bioavailability between the different formulations of buprenor-
phine, patients transitioning from one form of buprenorphine to
another should be monitored for efficacy and adverse effects.
Patient Selection and Treatment Goals
Buprenorphine is an effective treatment recommended
for patients who have opioid use disorder, are able to give
informed consent, and have no specific contraindications
for this treatment. Treatment with buprenorphine has the
following four goals:
1. suppress opioid withdrawal;
2. block the effects of illicit opioids;
3. reduce opioid craving and stop or reduce the use of illicit
opioid;
4. promote and facilitate patient engagement in recovery-
oriented activities including psychosocial intervention.
There is ample evidence for the efficacy of buprenor-
phine for the treatment of opioid use disorder108Buprenor-
phine poses significantly lower risk for overdose compared to
full agonist opioids due to the ceiling effects of buprenorphine
for respiratory depression at higher doses. Consequently,
buprenorphine has been approved for OBOT.
Precautions
Alcohol or Sedative, Hypnotic, or Anxiolytic Use
Some studies have shown potential adverse interactions
between buprenorphine and sedatives. While the combined
use of these drugs increases the risk of serious side effects, the
harm caused by untreated opioid use disorder can outweigh
these risks. However, patients with opioid use disorder and
concurrent alcohol, sedative, hypnotic, or anxiolytic use dis-
orders may need more intensive monitoring during office-
based treatment with buprenorphine to minimize the risk of
adverse events. Patients with these co-occurring disorders
may be better treated in a setting with greater supervision
such as an OTP. See ‘‘Part 2: Treatment Options: Contra-
indications and Precautions’’ for additional information.
Treatment Access
The DATA 2000, CARA 2016, and SUPPORT 2018,
laws respectively allow qualifying physicians, NPs, PAs, and
other qualifying practitioners including clinical nurse special-
ists, certified registered nurse anesthetists, and certified nurse
midwives to obtain waivers from SAMHSA to prescribe
buprenorphine in their office practices or in a clinic set-
ting.105,107,109
Both the monoproduct and combination product are
approved by the FDA for the treatment of opioid use disorder
and can be used in settings outside of an OTP. Providers who
wish to prescribe buprenorphine for the treatment of opioidWhite et el. /C15Adopted by the ASAM Board of Directors December 18, 2019
40 /C2232020 American Society of Addiction Medicine
Copyright © 2020 American Society of Addiction Medicine. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.use disorder or withdrawal management must obtain a waiver
under DATA 2000. Providers with DATA 2000 waivers may
treat opioid use disorder with approved buprenorphine prod-
ucts in any practice settings in which they are otherwise
credentialed to practice and in which such treatment would
be medically appropriate (this may be subject to additional
state regulations). The SUPPORT 2018 Act also made per-
manent the prescribing authority for PAs and NPs and allows
waivered practitioners to immediately treat 100 patients at a
time if the practitioner is board certified in addiction medicine
or addiction psychiatry; or if the practitioner provides bupre-
norphine in a qualified practice setting.107,110,111The legisla-
tion also codified SAMHSA’s regulations allowing certain
practitioners to treat up to 275 patients. See Exhibit 4 ‘‘Clini-
cian Qualifications for OBOT’’ for further details.
Exhibit 4: Clinician Qualifications for OBOT
To qualify for a DATA 2000 waiver, a physician must hold
a current, valid state medical license and a drug enforcement
agency (DEA) registration number. In addition, the physician
must meet at least one of the following criteria outlined by the
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, SAMHSA:
1. The physician holds a subspecialty board certification in
addiction medicine or addiction psychiatry by The Amer-
ican Board of Preventive Medicine or the American Board
of Psychiatry and Neurology
2. The physician holds a subspecialty board certification in
addiction psychiatry from the American Board of Medical
Specialties.
3. The physician holds an addiction certification or board
certification from ASAM or the American Board of
Addiction Medicine. (ASAM certification was taken over
by the American Board of Addiction Medicine in 2007.)
4. The physician holds a subspecialty board certification
in addiction medicine from the American Osteopathic
Association.
5. The physician has, with respect to the treatment and
management of patients with opioid use disorder, com-
pleted not less than 8 hours of training (through classroom
situations, seminars at professional society meetings, elec-
tronic communications, or otherwise) that is provided by
ASAM, the American Academy of Addiction Psychiatry,
the American Medical Association, the American Osteo-
pathic Association, the American Psychiatric Association,
or any other organization that the Secretary determines is
appropriate for purposes of this subclause.
6. The physician has participated as an investigator in one or
more clinical trials leading to the approval of a narcotic
drug in schedule III, IV, or V for maintenance or detoxifi-
cation treatment, as demonstrated by a statement submit-
ted to the Secretary by the sponsor of such approved drug.
7. The physician has such other training or experience as the
state medical licensing board (of the state in which the
physician will provide maintenance or detoxification treat-
ment) considered to demonstrate the ability of the physi-
cian to treat and manage patients with opioid use disorder.
8. The physician has such other training or experience as the
Secretary considers to demonstrate the ability of thephysician to treat and manage patients with opioid use
disorder. Any criteria of the Secretary under this subclause
shall be established by regulation. Any such criteria are
effective only for 3 years after the date on which the
criteria are promulgated but may be extended for such
additional discrete 3-year periods as the Secretary con-
siders appropriate for purposes of this subclause. Such
an extension of criteria may only be effectuated through
a statement published in the Federal Register by the
Secretary during the 30-day period preceding the end of
the 3-year period involved.
9. The physician graduated in good standing from an accred-
ited school of allopathic medicine or osteopathic medicine
in the United States during the 5-year period immediately
preceding the date on which the physician submits to the
Secretary a written notification of the intent of the physician
to begin dispensing drugs to patients for maintenance or
detoxification treatment and successfully completed a com-
prehensive allopathic or osteopathic medicine curriculum or
accredited medical residency that included not less than
8 hours of training on treating and managing patients with
opioid use disorder and meets the statutory requirements.
Qualifying NPs and PAs, clinical nurse specialists,
certified registered nurse anesthetists, and certified nurse
midwives are required to:
1. be licensed under state law to prescribe schedule III, IV,
or V medications for the treatment of pain;
2. obtain no fewer than 24 hours of initial training provided
by one of the following organization: ASAM, American
Academy of Addiction Psychiatry, American Medical
Association, American Osteopathic Association, Ameri-
can Nurses Credentialing Center, American Psychiatric
Association, American Association of Nurse Practitioners,
American Academy of Physician Assistants, or any other
organization that the Secretary of Health and Human
Services determines is appropriate;
3. have such other training or experience as the Secretary
determines will demonstrate the ability of the practitioner
to treat and manage patients with opioid use disorder;
4. be supervised by, or works in collaboration with, a quali-
fying physician, if required by state law to prescribe
medications for the treatment of opioid use disorder in
collaboration with or under the supervision of a physician.
Initiation
The setting for initiation of buprenorphine should be
carefully considered. During initiation, both office-based and
home-based observation is considered safe and effective.
Initiation within the clinician’s office was traditionally rec-
ommended to reduce the risk of precipitated opioid with-
drawal. However, home-based buprenorphine initiation has
become increasingly common in recent years and is consid-
ered safe and effective under appropriate circumstances.
Clinical judgement should be used to determine the most
appropriate setting for a given patient and may include
consideration of the patient’s past experience with buprenor-
phine and assessment of their ability to manage initiation at
home.110,112,113/C15Adopted by the ASAM Board of Directors December 18, 2019 NPG for the Treatment of Opioid Use Disorder
/C2232020 American Society of Addiction Medicine 41
Copyright © 2020 American Society of Addiction Medicine. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.Buprenorphine has a higher affinity for the mu-opioid
receptor compared to most full opioid agonists. Because
buprenorphine is a partial mu-agonist, the risk of overdose
during buprenorphine initiation is low. However, buprenor-
phine will displace full agonists from the receptor with
resultant reduction in opioid effects. Thus, some patients
may experience precipitated withdrawal if insufficient time
has elapsed since their last dose of opioids.
Patients who are currently dependent on opioids should
wait until they are experiencing mild to moderate opioid
withdrawal before taking the first dose of buprenorphine to
reduce the risk of precipitated withdrawal. Clinicians should
use objective signs of opioid withdrawal before initiating
buprenorphine initiation. Generally, buprenorphine initiation
should occur at least 6–12 hours after the last use of heroin or
other short-acting opioids, and 24–72 hours after the last use
of long-acting opioids such as methadone.
During office-based initiation of buprenorphine, the use
of the COWS can be helpful in determining if patients are
experiencing mild to moderate withdrawal.81A COWS score
of 11–12 or more is generally indicative of sufficient with-
drawal to allow a safe and comfortable initiation onto bupre-
norphine. For home-based initiation, clinicians should discuss
with patients the importance of waiting for physical symp-
toms of opioid withdrawal (e.g. pupil dilation, goose bumps,
gastrointestinal discomfort, etc.) before taking their first dose
of buprenorphine to prevent precipitated withdrawal.
With the increasing prevalence of fentanyl, concerns
have been raised about whether the protocol for initiation onto
buprenorphine should be modified for patients regularly using
this or other high potency opioids. Fentanyl is short acting but
has a long half-life (8–10 hours) and a relatively high affinity
for the mu-opioid receptor.80Some clinicians have recom-
mended waiting until patients are in at least moderate with-
drawal (COWS score of 13 or higher) before initiating
buprenorphine. However, there is little existing evidence
addressing this issue.
Treatment decisions for patients transferring from
another provider or with previous buprenorphine treatment
experience should be individualized and based on the patient’s
medical and treatment history.
Dosing
At Initiation
The risk of precipitated withdrawal can be reduced by
using a lower initial dose of buprenorphine. An initial dose of
2–4 mg and observation of the patient for signs of precipitated
withdrawal is recommended. If 60–90 minutes have passed
without the onset of withdrawal symptoms, then additional
dosing can be done in increments of 2–8 mg. Repeat of the
COWS during initiation can be useful in assessing the effect of
buprenorphine dose. Once it has been established that the
initial dose is well tolerated, the buprenorphine dose can be
increased fairly rapidly to a dose that provides stable effects
for 24 hours and is clinically effective. One extended-release
buprenorphine injections that received tentative FDA
approval in December 2018 is indicated for initiation, stabili-
zation and maintenance treatment when administered as aonce-weekly or once-monthly injection. Only a single prior
dose of transmucosal buprenorphine is required prior to
initiation. Research on the use of the extended release for-
mulations is emerging and, therefore, the clinical committee
recommends that clinicians use these products as indicated
and be mindful of further evidence as it becomes available.
After Initiation
Evidence suggests that buprenorphine doses of 16 mg or
more per day or more may be more effective than lower doses
at suppressing illicit opioid use.15The FDA generally rec-
ommends dosing to a limit of 24 mg per day, noting that there
is limited evidence regarding the relative efficacy of higher
doses. In addition, the use of higher doses may increase the
risk of diversion.
Adverse Effects
Buprenorphine and combinations of buprenorphine and
naloxone are generally well tolerated. Side effects reported
with these medications include headache, anxiety, constipa-
tion, perspiration, fluid retention in lower extremities, urinary
hesitancy, and sleep disturbance. Unlike treatment with meth-
adone, QT-interval prolongation does not seem to be an
adverse effect associated with buprenorphine treatment.
Psychosocial Treatment
All patients should be assessed for psychosocial needs,
and patients should be offered or referred to psychosocial
treatment based on their individual needs. The types and
duration of psychosocial treatment will vary, and the topic
is discussed further in Part 7: Psychosocial Treatment in
Conjunction With Medications for the Treatment of Opioid
Use Disorder. However, a patient’s decision to decline psy-
chosocial treatment or the absence of available psychosocial
treatment should not preclude or delay pharmacological
treatment of opioid use disorder, with appropriate medication
management. Motivational interviewing or enhancement
should be used to encourage patients to engage in psychoso-
cial treatment or recovery support services appropriate for
addressing their individual needs. In the absence of added
psychosocial treatment, clinicians may need to further indi-
vidualize treatment plans to address the potential for issues
related to adherence and diversion.
Monitoring Treatment
Patients should be seen frequently at the beginning of
their treatment until patients are determined to be stable. The
stability of a patient is determined by an individual clinician
based on several indicators which may include abstinence from
illicit drugs, participation in psychosocial treatment and other
recovery-based activities, and productive occupational and
social functioning. Stable patients can be seen less frequently.
Accessing PDMP data is advisable to check for other
medications that the patient may be receiving. Due to varia-
tion in state PDMP laws, clinicians are encouraged to be
familiar with the legal requirements associated with PDMPs
and prescribing of controlled substances in their state. In
addition, drug testing in combination with a patient’s self-
reported information about substance use is recommended asWhite et el. /C15Adopted by the ASAM Board of Directors December 18, 2019
42 /C2232020 American Society of Addiction Medicine
Copyright © 2020 American Society of Addiction Medicine. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.a monitoring tool during treatment. Note that medications
dispensed through an OTP or other treatment program
subject to the substance use disorder confidentiality regula-
tions (42 CFR Part 2) and are typically not captured in
state PDMPs.
Urine drug testing is a reasonably practical and reliable
method to test for adherence t o medication and illicit drug
use. However, other reliable biological tests for the presence
of drugs may be used. The frequency of drug testing should
be determined by a number of factors, including the stability
of the patient, the type of treatment, and the treatment
setting.14Drug testing is required a minimum of eight times
p e ry e a rf o rp a t i e n t si nO T P .T e sting may include substances
such as buprenorphine, illicit o pioids, cocaine, methamphet-
amine, cannabis, and controlled prescription medications
including benzodiazepines, opioids, and amphetamines.
How often and exactly what drugs should be tested to
optimize treatment has not been definitively established.
SeeThe ASAM Appropriate Use of Drug Testing in Clinical
Addiction Medicine guidance document for more informa-
tion.14
Continued substance use by the patient is not a suffi-
cient reason to discontinue buprenorphine treatment. If a
patient is continuing to use substances it may reflect the need
for a change in treatment plan including a change in medica-
tion, dosage, or level of care.
Clinicians should take steps to reduce the chance of
diversion. Diversion has been reported with both buprenor-
phine monotherapy and combination buprenorphine/nalox-
one.114Strategies to reduce the potential of diversion may
include frequent office visits, drug testing including testing
for buprenorphine and metabolites, observed dosing, and
recall visits for pill counts. Patients receiving treatment with
buprenorphine should be counseled to have adequate means to
secure their medications to prevent theft or accidental inges-
tion by young children. Unused medication should be dis-
posed of safely.73
Patients who discontinue agonist therapy should be
made aware of the risks associated with an opioid overdose,
and especially the increased risk of overdose death. Patients
should also be made aware of other risks associated with
intravenous drug use including the risk of infections (HIV,
Hepatitis C, endocarditis, sepsis, etc.). Treatment alternatives
including methadone (see Part 4) and naltrexone (see Part 6),
as well as opioid overdose prevention with naloxone (see part
13) should be discussed with any patient choosing to
discontinue treatment.
Length of Treatment
There is no recommended time limit for treatment with
buprenorphine. Clinicians shoul d not encourage patients to
discontinue medication based o n a pre-determined duration
of treatment. While the research is limited, available research
generally suggests that longer du ration of treatment results in
better outcomes. The National Institute on Drug Abuse’s
Principles of Drug Addiction Treatment notes that individu-
als progress through addictio n Treatment at various rates and
positive outcomes are contingent on adequate treatment
duration.75Generally, treatment par ticipation for less than90 days is of limited effectiveness, and treatment lasting
significantly longer is assoc iated with more positive long-
term outcomes.
Patients and clinicians should not take the decision to
terminate treatment with buprenorphine lightly. Buprenor-
phine taper and discontinuation is a slow process and close
monitoring is recommended. Buprenorphine tapering is gen-
erally accomplished over several months. Factors associated
with successful termination of treatment with buprenorphine
are not well described or supported by outcomes. Factors that
may be taken into consideration or given emphasis in this
decision include:
1. employment and financial stability;
2. housing stability;
3. engagement in mutual-help programs, or involvement in
other meaningful activities;
4. sustained abstinence from opioid and other drugs during
treatment;
5. positive changes in the psychosocial environment;
6. evidence of additional psychosocial supports;
7. persistent engagement in treatment for ongoing monitor-
ing past the point of medication discontinuation.
Patients who relapse after pharmacotherapy has been
discontinued should be returned to treatment with buprenor-
phine.
Transitioning Between Treatment Medications
Buprenorphine is generally tolerated well by patients.
Transitioning from buprenorphine to other opioid treatment
medications may be appropriate in the following cases:
1. patient experiences intolerable side effects;
2. patient has not been successful in attaining or maintaining
their treatment goals through the initially chosen pharma-
cotherapy;
3. patient wants to change and is a candidate for alternative
treatment.
Transitioning to Methadone
Transitioning from buprenorphine to methadone does
not typically result in any type of adverse reaction since
moving from a partial opioid agonist to a full agonist does
not pose a risk for precipitating withdrawal symptoms. No
time delay is required in transitioning a patient from bupre-
norphine to treatment with methadone.
Transitioning to Naltrexone
Buprenorphine has a long half-life; 7–14 days should
typically elapse between the last dose of buprenorphine and
the start of naltrexone to ensure that the patient is not
physically dependent on opioids before starting naltrexone.
A naloxone challenge (see Glossary) may be useful before
starting naltrexone to demonstrate an absence of physical
dependence. Recently, investigators have begun to evaluate
newer methods of rapidly transitioning patients from bupre-
norphine to naltrexone using repeated dosing over several
days with very low doses of naltrexone along with ancillary
medications.115Although the results are promising, it is too/C15Adopted by the ASAM Board of Directors December 18, 2019 NPG for the Treatment of Opioid Use Disorder
/C2232020 American Society of Addiction Medicine 43
Copyright © 2020 American Society of Addiction Medicine. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.early to recommend these techniques for general practice, and
the doses of naltrexone used may not be readily available to
most clinicians.
Summary of Recommendations – Buprenorphine
1.
 Buprenorphine is a recommended treatment for
patients with opioid use disorder, who are able to give
informed consent and have no specific contraindication
for this treatment.
2.
 For patients who are currently
opioid dependent, buprenorphine should not be initiated
until there are objective signs of opioid withdrawal to
reduce the risk of precipitated withdrawal.
3.
 Once objective signs of with-
drawal are observed, initiation of buprenorphine should
start with a dose of 2–4 mg. Dosages may be increased in
increments of 2–8 mg.
4.
 The setting for initiation of bupre-
norphine should be carefully considered. Both office-based
and home-based initiation are considered safe and effective
when starting buprenorphine treatment. Clinical judgement
should be used to determine the most appropriate setting for
a given patient and may include consideration of the
patient’s past experience with buprenorphine and assess-
ment of their ability to manage initiation at home.
5.
 Following initiation, buprenor-
phine dose should be titrated to alleviate symptoms.
To be effective, buprenorphine dose should be sufficient
to enable patients to discontinue illicit opioid use. Evi-
dence suggests that 16 mg per day or more may be more
effective than lower doses. There is limited evidence
regarding the relative efficacy of doses higher than 24 mg
per day, and the use of higher doses may increase the risk
of diversion.15
6.
 The FDA recently approved several new bupre-
norphine formulations for treatment of opioid use disor-
der (see Table 1). As data regarding the effectiveness of
these products are currently limited, clinicians should use
these products as indicated and be mindful of emerging
evidence as it becomes available.
7.
 Patients’ psychosocial needs should
be assessed, and patients should be offered or referred to
psychosocial treatment based on their individual needs, in
conjunction with buprenorphine in the treatment of opioid
use disorder. However, a patient’s decision to decline
psychosocial treatment or the absence of available psycho-
social treatment should not preclude or delay buprenorphine
treatment, with appropriate medication management. Moti-
vational interviewing or enhancement can be used to
encourage patients to engage in psychosocial treatment
services appropriate for addressing their individual needs.
8.
 Clinicians should take steps to
reduce the chance of buprenorphine diversion. Recom-
mended strategies may include frequent office visits (e.g.,
weekly in early treatment); drug testing, including testing
for buprenorphine and metabolites; and recall visits for
medication counts. Refer to ASAM’s Sample Diversion
Control Policy for additional strategies to reduce the risk
for diversion .169.
 Drug testing should be used to
monitor patients for adherence to buprenorphine and
use of illicit and controlled substances. For additional
guidance see The ASAM Appropriate Use of Drug Testing
in Clinical Addiction Medicine .14
10.
 Patients should be seen frequently
at the beginning of treatment until they are determined to
be stable.
11. When considering a transition from buprenorphine to nal-
trexone, providers should note that 7–14 days should
typically elapse between the last dose of buprenorphine
and the start of naltrexone to ensure that the patient is not
physically dependent on opioids before starting naltrexone.
12.
 When considering a transition
from buprenorphine to methadone, there is no required
time delay because the transition to a full mu-opioid
agonist from a partial agonist does not typically result in
an adverse reaction.
13.
 There is no recommended time
limit for pharmacological treatment with buprenorphine.
Patients who discontinue buprenorphine treatment
should be made aware of the risks associated with opioid
overdose, and especially the increased risk of death if
they return to illicit opioid use. Treatment alternatives
including methadone (see Part 4) and naltrexone (see Part
6), as well as opioid overdose prevention with naloxone
(see part 13) should be discussed with any patient choos-
ing to discontinue treatment.
14.
 Buprenorphine taper and discon-
tinuation is a slow process and close monitoring is
recommended. Buprenorphine tapering is generally
accomplished over several months. Patients should be
encouraged to remain in treatment for ongoing monitor-
ing past the point of discontinuation.
Areas for Further Research
1. Further research is needed on the comparative effective-
ness of newly approved buprenorphine formulations.
2. Further research is needed on how to determine the opti-
mal length of treatment with buprenorphine for individual
patients.
3. More research is needed to identify best practices for
linking patients to continuing care when buprenorphine
is initiated in an acute care setting.
4. Further research is needed to assess the effectiveness of
specific types of psychosocial treatment in combination
with buprenorphine. Evidence is needed to determine
when added psychosocial treatment improves patient out-
comes, and which psychosocial treatments are beneficial
to which patients.
PART 6: NALTREXONE
Background
Extended release injectable naltrexone is a long-acting
opioid antagonist that may be used to prevent relapse to opioid
use. Naltrexone blocks the effects of opioids if they are used.
Naltrexone is available in oral and extended-release injectable
formulations.White et el. /C15Adopted by the ASAM Board of Directors December 18, 2019
44 /C2232020 American Society of Addiction Medicine
Copyright © 2020 American Society of Addiction Medicine. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.Formulations of Naltrexone: Oral Versus
Extended-Release Injectable
Except under special circum stances, evidence does not
support the use of oral naltrexone as an effective treatment
for prevention of opioid use disorder relapse. A meta-analy-
sis of 1,158 participants in 13 randomized trials comparing
treatment with oral naltre xone to either placebo or no
medication found oral naltr exone was not superior to pla-
cebo or to no medication in e ither treatment retention or
preventing return to illicit opioid use.72Studies that found
oral naltrexone effective we re conducted in situations in
which patients were highly motivated, were legally man-
dated to receive treatment, a nd/or taking the medication
under the supervision of the ir family or significant
others.72,116
Extended-release naltrexone is more effective than
placebo117or no medication118,119in preventing return to
illicit opioid use, and while not eliminating, reduces the poor
adherence observed with the oral formulation. Extended-
release injectable naltrexone should generally be adminis-
tered every 4 weeks by deep IM injection in the gluteal muscle
at a set dosage of 380 mg per injection. Some patients,
including those who metabolize naltrexone more rapidly,
may benefit from dosing as frequently as every 3 weeks.
One trial found naltrexone to be efficacious in patients with
more than one substance use disorder and using more than one
drug (heroin and amphetamines), which is common in patients
with opioid use disorder.120
Patient Selection and Treatment Goals
Extended-release injectable naltrexone and under lim-
ited circumstances, oral naltrexone, are effective treatments
recommended for patients to prevent relapse to opioid use
disorder, are able to give informed consent, are fully with-
drawn from opioids, and have no specific contraindications
for this treatment.
Treatment with naltrexone generally has the following
four goals:
1. prevent relapse to opioid use in patients who have been
detoxified and are no longer physically dependent on
opioids;
2. block the effects of illicit opioids;
3. reduce opioid craving;
4. promote and facilitate patient engagement in recovery-
oriented activities including psychosocial interventions.
Oral Naltrexone
In line with multiple other guidelines and government
agencies, the Guideline Committee does not recommend the
use of oral naltrexone except under very limited circum-
stances. Examples of limited circumstances under which
treatment with oral naltrexone might be considered include:
(1) for highly compliant and motivated patients such as safety
sensitive workers (e.g. police, firefighters, and healthcare
professionals) or other individuals with high levels of moni-
toring and knowledge of negative consequences for non-
adherence; (2) patients w ho wish to take an opioid
receptor antagonist but are unabl e to take extended-releasenaltrexone (e.g. patients who may need an opioid analgesic
within the next month); and (3) patients who may benefit
from medication to p revent return to i llicit drug use but
cannot or will not take extended-release naltrexone and do
not wish to be treated with (or do not have access to) opioid
agonists. Under these limited c ircumstances in which oral
naltrexone might be appropriate and following a negative
naloxone challenge, the first oral dose of naltrexone can be
2 5 m g ,i n c r e a s i n gt o5 0 m gd a i l yf r o md a y2o ft r e a t m e n t .
Those who tolerate a daily dose of 50 mg may be switched to a
3-day per week regimen (two 100-mg doses, followed by one
150-mg dose) for a total weekly dose of 350 mg. Adherence
must be closely monitored when reducing to a 3-day per
week regimen.
Extended-Release Injectable Naltrexone
As described in ‘‘Part 2: Treatment Options’’, extended-
release injectable naltrexone is indicated for the prevention of
relapse to opioid use disorder, following complete opioid
withdrawal. It may be useful for patients who have contra-
indications to treatment with buprenorphine or methadone;
patients for whom buprenorphine and methadone were not
successful treatment modalities; individuals who are highly
motivated to taper off their current agonist therapy; or patients
who do not want to be treated with an agonist.
Precautions
Risk of Relapse and Subsequent Opioid Overdose
Patients maintained on naltrexone will have diminished
tolerance to opioids and may be unaware of the consequent
increased sensitivity to opioids if they stop taking naltrexone.
Patients who discontinue antagonist therapy should be made
aware of this phenomenon. If the patient stops naltrexone and
resumes use of opioids in doses that do not reflect the degree
to which they have lost tolerance, there is risk of an opioid
overdose.121A similar dynamic occurs in patients who
undergo withdrawal management with no meaningful fol-
low-up treatment, or those who drop out of methadone or
buprenorphine treatment.
Course of Treatment
Initiation
Before administering naltrexone, it is important that the
patient has been adequately wit hdrawn from opioids and is no
longer physically dependent. Naltrexone can precipitate
severe withdrawal symptoms in patients who have not been
adequately withdrawn from opioids. As a general rule,
patients should be free from short-acting opioids for about
6 days before starting naltrexone, and free from long-acting
opioids such as methadone and buprenorphine for 7–10 days.
A naloxone challenge can be used if it is uncertain whether
the patient is no longer physically dependent on opioids. In
the naloxone challenge, naloxone hydrochloride (a shorter-
acting injectable opioid antagonist) is administered and the
patient is monitored for signs and symptoms of withdrawal. A
low-dose oral naltrexone ch allenge has been used as
an alternative./C15Adopted by the ASAM Board of Directors December 18, 2019 NPG for the Treatment of Opioid Use Disorder
/C2232020 American Society of Addiction Medicine 45
Copyright © 2020 American Society of Addiction Medicine. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.Dosing
Extended-release injectable naltrexone can be given
every 3–4 weeks by deep intramuscular (IM) injection in
the gluteal muscle at a set dosage of 380 mg per injection.
Whereas the injection interval is generally every 4 weeks,
some patients may metabolize naltrexone more rapidly.
Patients may report experiencing break through cravings or
being able to overcome the opioid receptor blockade at some
point in the month. While there are no current studies evalu-
ating more frequent dosing, the consensus of the Guideline
Committee was that some patients, including those who
metabolize naltrexone more rapidly, may benefit from dosing
as frequently as every 3 weeks.
Under the limited circumstances for which oral naltrex-
one is appropriate, it can be dosed at: 50 mg daily or three
times weekly dosing with two 100-mg doses followed by one
150-mg dose. Oral naltrexone seems to be most useful when
there is a support person to administer and supervise the
medication. A support person may be a family member, close
friend, or an employer.
Adverse Effects
Naltrexone, both oral and extended-release injectable, is
generally well tolerated. Apart from opioids, it does not
typically interact with other medications. Most common side
effects in random order can include insomnia, lack of energy/
sedation, anxiety, nausea, vomiting, abdominal pain/cramps,
headache, cold symptoms, joint and muscle pain, and injec-
tion site reactions specific to extended-release injectable
naltrexone. To reduce injection site reactions in obese
patients, a longer needle size may be used.34
Psychosocial Treatment
The psychosocial needs of patients treated with nal-
t r e x o n es h o u l db ea s s e s s e d ,a n dp a t i e n t ss h o u l db eo f f e r e do r
referred to psychosocial treatment based on their individual
needs. Research on extended-released injectable naltrexone
as a standalone therapy withou t psychosocial treatment is
limited. In addition, the types of psychosocial treatments
studied have varied, and there is no clear guidance on what
psychosocial treatment shoul d be provided in conjunction
with naltrexone. Therefore, as with buprenorphine and meth-
adone, psychosocial treatment should be offered in conjunc-
tion with naltrexone treatment but a patient’s decision to
decline psychosocial treatment or the absence of available
psychosocial treatment should not preclude or delay treat-
ment of opioid use disorder with naltrexone, with appropriate
medication management. Motivational interviewing or
enhancement can be used to encourage patients to engage
in psychosocial treatment or s upport services appropriate for
addressing their individual n eeds. In the absence of added
psychosocial treatment, clinic ians may need to further indi-
vidualize treatment plans to address the potential for issues
r e l a t e dt oa d h e r e n c e .
However, given the paucity of evidence of demon-
strated efficacy of extended release naltrexone without psy-
chosocial treatment, metha done or buprenorphine may be
the preferred pharmacotherapy in the absence of psychoso-
cial treatment (for more recommendations regardingpsychosocial treatment, see Pa rt 7: Psychosocial Treatment
in Conjunction with Medications for the Treatment of Opioid
Use Disorder).
Monitoring Treatment
Patients should be seen frequently at the beginning of
their treatment until they are determined to be stable. The
stability of a patient is determined by an individual clinician
based on several indicators which may include abstinence
from illicit drugs, participation in psychosocial treatment and
other recovery-based activities, and occupational and social
functioning. Stable patients can be seen less frequently but
should be seen at least monthly.
Accessing PDMP data is advisable to check for use of
other prescription medications (note: medications dispensed
through an OTP, and in some cases those prescribed or
dispensed by treatment programs subject to the substance
use disorder confidentiality regulations (42 CFR Part 2) are
not captured in state PDMPs).
In addition, drug testing is recommended. Urine
drug testing is a reasonably pr actical and reliable method
to test for adherence to me dication and illicit drug use.
However, other reliable biological tests for the presence of
drugs may be used. The frequency of drug testing will be
determined by a number of factors, including the stability
of the patient, the type of treatment, and the treatment
setting.14Drug testing is required a minimum of eight times
per year for patients in OTP. Testing may include substan-
ces such as illicit opioids, cocaine, methamphetamine,
cannabis, and controlled prescription medications includ-
ing benzodiazepines, opioids, and amphetamines. How
often and exactly what drugs should be tested for to opti-
mize treatment has not been defi nitively established. (For
detailed recommendations see The ASAM Appropriate Use
of Drug Testing in Clinical Addiction Medicine guidance
document.)14
Length of Treatment
There is no recommended length of treatment with
naltrexone. While the research is limited, available research
generally suggests that longer duration of addiction treatment
results in better outcomes. The National Institute on Drug
Abuse’s Principles of Drug Addiction treatment notes that
individuals progress through addiction treatment at various
rates and positive outcomes are contingent on adequate
treatment duration.75Generally, treatment participation for
less than 90 days is of limited effectiveness, and treatment
lasting significantly longer is associated with more positive
long-term outcomes. Duration of treatment should depend on
the response of the individual patient, the patient’s individual
circumstances, and clinical judgment.
Patients who discontinue naltrexone treatment should
be made aware of the increased risks associated with opioid
overdose, and especially the increased risk of overdose death,
if they return to illicit opioid use. Treatment alternatives
including methadone (see Part 4) and buprenorphine (see
Part 5), as well as overdose prevention with naloxone (see
part 13) should be discussed with any patient choosing to
discontinue treatment.White et el. /C15Adopted by the ASAM Board of Directors December 18, 2019
46 /C2232020 American Society of Addiction Medicine
Copyright © 2020 American Society of Addiction Medicine. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.Transitioning Between Treatment Medications
Transitioning from naltrexone to other opioid treatment
medications may be appropriate in the following cases:
1. patient experiences intolerable side effects;
2. patient has not been successful in attaining or maintaining
their treatment goals through the initially chosen pharma-
cotherapy;
3. patient wants to change medications and is a candidate for
alternative treatment.
Transfer of medications should be planned, considered,
and monitored. Transitioning from an antagonist such as
naltrexone to a full agonist (methadone) or a partial agonist
(buprenorphine) is generally less complicated than transition-
ing from a full or partial agonist to an antagonist because there
is no physical dependence associated with antagonist treat-
ment. Patients being transitioned from naltrexone to bupre-
norphine or methadone will not have physical dependence on
opioids and thus the initial doses of methadone or buprenor-
phine used may be low and titration to the maintenance dose
should be done slowly and carefully. The clinician should
discuss with the patient the potential for sedation, impairment,
and fatigue, and carefully monitor these symptoms during
initiation and titration. Patients should not be transitioned
until a significant amount of the naltrexone is no longer in
their system this varies but is typically about 1 day for
oral naltrexone or 28 days for extended-release injectable
naltrexone.
Summary of Recommendations – Naltrexone
1.
 Extended-release injectable nal-
trexone is a recommended treatment for preventing relapse
to opioid use disorder in patients who are no longer
physically dependent on opioids, able to give informed
consent, and have no contraindications for this treatment.
2.
 Extended-release injectable nal-
trexone should generally be administered every 4 weeks
by deep IM injection in the gluteal muscle at the set dosage
of 380 mg per injection. Some patients, including those
who metabolize naltrexone more rapidly, may benefit from
dosing as frequently as every 3 weeks.
3.
 Oral naltrexone is not recom-
mended except under limited circumstances (see Part 6
for more details).
4.
 Patients’ psychosocial needs should
be assessed, and patients should be offered or referred to
psychosocial treatment based on their individual needs, in
conjunction with extended-release naltrexone. A patient’s
decision to decline psychosocial treatment or the absence
of available psychosocial treatment should not preclude or
delay naltrexone treatment, with appropriate medication
management. Motivational interviewing or enhancement
can be used to encourage patients to engage in psychoso-
cial treatment services appropriate for addressing their
individual needs.
5.
 There is no recommended length of
treatment with naltrexone. Duration depends on clinical
judgment and the patient’s individual circumstances.
Because there is no physical dependence associated withnaltrexone, it can be stopped abruptly without withdrawal
symptoms.
6.
 Transitioning from naltrexone to
methadone or buprenorphine should be planned, consid-
ered, and monitored. Transitioning from an antagonist
such as naltrexone to a full agonist (methadone) or a
partial agonist (buprenorphine) is generally less compli-
cated than transitioning from a full or partial agonist to an
antagonist because there is no physical dependence asso-
ciated with antagonist treatment and thus no possibility of
precipitated withdrawal. Patients being transitioned from
naltrexone to buprenorphine or methadone will not have
physical dependence on opioids and thus the initial doses
of methadone or buprenorphine should be low. Patients
should not be transitioned until a significant amount of the
naltrexone is no longer in their system, about 1 day for oral
naltrexone or 28 days for extended-release injectable
naltrexone.
7.
 Patients who discontinue naltrex-
one treatment should be made aware of the increased risks
associated with opioid overdose, and especially the
increased risk of overdose death, if they return to illicit
opioid use. Treatment alternatives including methadone
(see Part 4) and buprenorphine (see Part 5), as well as
overdose prevention with naloxone (see part 13) should
be discussed with any patient choosing to discontinue
treatment.
Areas for Further Research
1. Further research is needed to test the relative effectiveness
of extended-release injectable naltrexone as compared to
agonist treatment, including methadone and extended-
release injectable buprenorphine, in terms of treatment
retention, substance use outcomes, and mortality.
2. Further research is needed on optimal withdrawal man-
agement and initiation protocols to initiate treatment with
naltrexone and minimize the risk of precipitated with-
drawal.
3. Further research is needed on outcomes related to admin-
istering extended-release injectable naltrexone every
3 weeks for individuals who metabolize naltrexone at
higher rates.
4. Further research is needed on how to determine the opti-
mal length of treatment with naltrexone for individual
patients.
5. Further research is needed on the safety and efficacy of
naltrexone for pregnant women.
6. Further research is needed to develop more effective
strategies for improving adherence to extended-release
injectable naltrexone.
PART 7: PSYCHOSOCIAL TREATMENT IN
CONJUNCTION WITH MEDICATIONS FOR THE
TREATMENT OF OPIOID USE DISORDER
Background
Psychosocial treatment can help patients manage crav-
ings, reduce the likelihood of relapse, and assist them in
coping with the emotional and social challenges that often/C15Adopted by the ASAM Board of Directors December 18, 2019 NPG for the Treatment of Opioid Use Disorder
/C2232020 American Society of Addiction Medicine 47
Copyright © 2020 American Society of Addiction Medicine. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.accompany substance use disorders. Psychosocial treatment is
available in a variety of outpatient and inpatient settings, but
most studies have focused on outpatient treatment. Psycho-
social treatment is provided using a variety of approaches in
various milieus, including social skills training; individual,
group, and couples counseling; cognitive behavioral therapy;
motivational interviewing; and family therapy. Determining
level of need and best approach to psychosocial treatment
should be individualized to each patient. Mutual help and
other recovery support services complement professional
treatment, but do not substitute for professional treatment.
Goals of Psychosocial Treatment for Opioid
Use Disorder
Although psychosocial treatment options vary, common
therapeutic goals are to:
1. modify the underlying processes that maintain or reinforce
use behavior;
2. encourage engagement with and adherence to the treat-
ment plan, including pharmacotherapy; and
3. treat any concomitant psychiatric disorders that either
complicate a substance use disorder or act as a trigger
for relapse.
Components of Psychosocial Treatment for
Opioid Use Disorder
Psychosocial treatment should be considered in con-
junction with all pharmacological treatments for opioid use
disorder. However, because of the potential harm associated
with untreated opioid use disorder, a patient’s decision to
decline psychosocial treatment or the absence of available
psychosocial treatment should not preclude or delay pharma-
cological treatment of opioid use disorder, with appropriate
medication management. Motivational interviewing or
enhancement can be used to encourage patients to engage
in psychosocial treatment or support services appropriate for
addressing their individual needs. In the absence of added
psychosocial treatment, clinicians may need to further indi-
vidualize treatment plans to address the potential for issues
related to adherence and diversion.
At a minimum, the psychosocial treatment component
of the overall treatment program should include the following:
1. assessment of psychosocial needs;
2. individual and/or group counseling;
3. linkages to existing support systems; and
4. referrals to community-based services.
Psychosocial treatment ma y also include more inten-
sive individual counseling and psychotherapy, contingency
management, and mental health services. Broader psychoso-
cial support includes recovery support services, case man-
agement, and more specific social needs assistance (e.g.,
employment, housing, legal ser vices, etc.). Furthermore,
interventions related to the provision of and education around
harm reduction services including naloxone distribution,
sterile syringe services, safe i njection practices, risky behav-
ior modification, contraceptio n access (including the optionof long-acting reversible contraception), etc., should be
considered and incorporated i nto a patient’s treatment plan
as appropriate.
Efficacy of Psychosocial Treatments in Opioid
Use Disorder
The systematic review of psychosocial interventions
conducted as part of the 2015 guideline development process
found that in general psychosocial therapy in combination
with pharmacotherapy appears to improve clinical out-
comes.122The review noted significant gaps in the literature
including a lack of information about which psychosocial
interventions are most effective in combination with specific
medications. Of note, a systematic review examining the
efficacy of adding specific, structured psychological treat-
ments to standard agonist maintenance treatments with stan-
dard clinician-led medical management and counselling, did
not improve treatment retention or decrease illicit opioid use
during treatment compared to standard treatment with agonist
medication.27This question has not been adequately studied
for treatment with naltrexone.
Evidence is available demonstrating the superiority of
some psychosocial treatments over others. Specifically, a
2008 meta-analysis compared 2,340 participants who
received one of the following interventions: contingency
management (CM), relapse prevention, cognitive behavioral
therapy (CBT), or CBT combined with CM. Participants
receiving any psychosocial treatment had better outcomes
than participants who did not. Contingency management and
the combined CM and CBT intervention produced better
outcomes than the other interventions.123
While questions remain about which specific psycho-
social therapies work best with which pharmacological
treatments, there is widespread support for recommending
psychosocial treatment as an important component of a
patient’s opioid use disorder treatment plan. The clinical
committee recommends that patients routinely be assessed
for psychosocial needs and offered or referred to psychoso-
cial treatments appropriate to their individual needs as an
adjunct to pharmacological treatments, with appropriate
medication management. Whi le, a patient’s decision to
decline psychosocial treatme nt or the absence of available
psychosocial treatment should not preclude or delay phar-
macological treatment of opioid use disorder, motivational
interviewing or enhancement can be used to encourage
patients to engage in psychosocial treatment or support
services appropriate for a ddressing their individual
needs. In the absence of added psychosocial treatment,
clinicians may need to further i ndividualize treatment plans
to address the potential for issues related to adherence,
and diversion.
Peer Support and Mutual-Help Programs
Although not considered by ASAM to be a psychosocial
treatment on their own, peer support services and mutual help
programs are ancillary service that may be an effective
adjunct to treatment. Peers who have successfully maintained
recovery can provide mentoring, advocacy, and connections
to community resources for individuals in treatment for opioidWhite et el. /C15Adopted by the ASAM Board of Directors December 18, 2019
48 /C2232020 American Society of Addiction Medicine
Copyright © 2020 American Society of Addiction Medicine. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.use disorder. Peer support services are increasingly offered in
medical settings to help engage patients in treatment. Mutual-
help programs may include 12-step programs such as Alco-
holics Anonymous (AA), Narcotics Anonymous (NA), and
Medication Assisted Recovery Anonymous (MARA). Other
mutual-help groups include Self-Management and Recovery
Therapy (SMART), and Moderation Management. Many
providers recommend mutual-help programs, but there is
anecdotal information to suggest that some of these programs
may be less accepting of patients receiving medications for
opioid use disorder.
Adherence to Psychosocial Treatment Within
Overall Treatment
Clinicians should determine the optimal type of psy-
chosocial treatment to which to refer patients based on shared
decision-making with the patient and in consideration of the
availability and accessibility of area resources. Collaboration
with qualified behavioral health providers is one way for
clinicians to determine the type of psychosocial treatment that
would best fit within a patient’s individualized treatment plan.
The ASAM Standards describe in standards III.1 and III.2 the
role of the clinician in coordinating care and providing
therapeutic alternatives.29Key concepts within these stand-
ards speak to the importance of patient education about
alternatives, shared decision-making in selection of therapeu-
tic services, and the incumbent responsibility of the clinician
to assure through the treatment planning and treatment man-
agement processes that psychosocial treatment is being
offered and that the patient is progressing toward mutually
agreed-upon goals. Treatment plans should be renegotiated
when patients do not follow through with psychosocial treat-
ment referrals and/or if it is determined that the treatment plan
goals are not being advanced.
Psychosocial Treatment and Treatment with
Methadone, Buprenorphine, or Naltrexone
As noted above, the current body of evidence suggests
that in general psychosocial treatment in conjunction with
pharmacotherapy improves patient outcomes. However, due
to mixed findings, it is unclear which specific components of
psychosocial treatment should be recommended. Some stud-
ies have found that the addition of psychosocial treatment
improves adherence and retention in treatment124–126and
improves withdrawal management outcomes,27while other
studies found no benefit to specific psychosocial treatments123
or report mixed findings.27,127–129The consensus of the
committee, as noted above, is that all patients prescribed
methadone, buprenorphine or naltrexone should be assessed
for psychosocial needs and offered or referred to psychosocial
treatments appropriate to their individual needs as an adjunct
to pharmacological treatments. A patient’s decision to decline
psychosocial treatment or the absence of available psychoso-
cial treatment should not preclude or delay treatment of opioid
use disorder with pharmacotherapy, with appropriate medica-
tion management. However, motivational interviewing or
enhancement can be used to encourage patients to engage
in psychosocial treatment or support services appropriate for
addressing their individual needs.Summary of Recommendations – Psychosocial
Treatment in Conjunction With Medications for
the Treatment of Opioid Use Disorder
1.
 Patients’ psychosocial needs should
be assessed, and patients should be offered or referred to
psychosocial treatment, based on their individual needs, in
conjunction with any pharmacotherapy for the treatment
of, or prevention of relapse to, opioid use disorder. How-
ever, a patient’s decision to decline psychosocial treatment
or the absence of available psychosocial treatment should
not preclude or delay pharmacological treatment of opioid
use disorder, with appropriate medication management.
Motivational interviewing or enhancement can be used to
encourage patients to engage in psychosocial treatment
services appropriate for addressing their individual needs.
2. Treatment planning should include collaboration with
qualified behavioral healthcare providers to determine
the optimal type and intensity of psychosocial treatment
and for renegotiation of the treatment plan for circum-
stances in which patients do not adhere to recommended
plans for, or referrals to, psychosocial treatment.
Areas for Further Research
1. Further research is needed to identify the comparative
advantages of specific psychosocial treatments.
2. Further study is needed to evaluate the effectiveness
of psychosocial treatment in combination with specific
pharmacotherapies.
3. Further research is needed on which concurrent psycho-
social treatments are most effective for different patient
populations and treatment settings including primary care.
4. Further research is needed on which psychosocial treat-
ments can be effectively delivered in primary care settings.
5. Further research is needed on effective strategies for
engaging patients in treatment, including models incorpo-
rating peer support.
PART 8: SPECIAL POPULATIONS: PREGNANT
WOMEN
Background
Many of the medical risks associated with opioid use
disorder are similar for both pregnant and nonpregnant
women; however, opioid use d isorder carri es obstetrical
risks for pregnant women. Seve ral obstetrical complications
have been associated with opioid use in pregnancy, including
preeclampsia, miscarriage, premature delivery, fetal growth
restriction, and fetal death.130It is difficult to establish the
extent to which these problems are due to opioid use,
withdrawal, or co-occurring use of other drugs. Other factors
that may contribute to obstetr ical complications include
concomitant maternal medical, nutritional, and psychoso-
cial issues.
Opioid use is also associated with neonatal abstinence
syndrome (NAS). NAS is the traditional term used to describe
the constellation of withdrawal signs infants exhibit following
prenatal exposure to substances that typically include opioid
agonists. Federal agencies now commonly use the term
neonatal opioid withdrawal syndrome (NOWS) to explicitly/C15Adopted by the ASAM Board of Directors December 18, 2019 NPG for the Treatment of Opioid Use Disorder
/C2232020 American Society of Addiction Medicine 49
Copyright © 2020 American Society of Addiction Medicine. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.link in utero opioid exposure to subsequent infant withdrawal
signs. Both terms are used in this document.
Pregnant women with active opioid use disorder should
be treated with methadone or buprenorphine as the standard of
care. Pregnant women with a history of opioid use disorder are
also candidates for opioid agonist treatment if a return to
opioid misuse is possible during pregnancy. Women who
choose a medication-free approach using psychosocial modal-
ities should be closely monitored.
Assessment of Opioid Use Disorder in
Pregnant Women
As is the case for any patient presenting for assessment
of opioid use disorder, the first clinical priority should be to
identify any emergent or urgent medical conditions that
require immediate attention. Diagnosing emergent conditions
can be challenging because women may present with symp-
toms that may be related to overdose and/or a complication in
pregnancy. A comprehensive assessment including medical
examination and psychosocial assessment is recommended in
evaluating opioid use disorder in pregnant women. However,
completion of all assessments should not delay or preclude
initiating pharmacotherapy for opioid use disorder. If not
completed before initiating treatment, assessments should
be completed soon thereafter. The clinician should ask ques-
tions in a direct and nonjudgmental manner to elicit a detailed
and accurate history.
Medical Examination
Physical Examination
A physical examination should be conducted for preg-
nant women who are presenting with potential opioid use
disorder. The examination should include identifying objec-
tive physical signs of opioid intoxication or withdrawal. The
objective physical signs for patients, including pregnant
women, are described in Part 1: Assessment and Diagnosis
of Opioid Use Disorder.
Obstetricians and gynecologists, and other healthcare
providers that care for pregnant women should be alert
to signs and symptoms of opioid use disorder. Pregnant
women with opioid use disorder are more likely to seek
prenatal care late in pregnancy, miss appointments, expe-
rience poor weight gain, or exhibit signs of withdrawal or
intoxication. Pregnant wome n with opioid use disorder,
as with non-pregnant individuals, also have a higher risk of
HIV and viral hepatitis which can impact pregnancy,
labor management and recommendations related to breast-
feeding. On physical examination, some signs of injection
drug use may include puncture marks, abscesses, or cellu-
litis.
Laboratory Tests
Women who use opioids intravenously are at high risk
for infections related to sharing injection syringes and sexu-
ally transmitted infections. Therefore, counseling and testing
for HIV should be provided to pregnant women with opioid
use disorder, according to state laws. Tests for hepatitis B and
C and liver enzymes are also suggested. Hepatitis A and Bvaccination is recommended for those whose viral hepatitis
serology is negative.
All pregnant women should be screened for substance
use with a validated screening tool. Women who screen
positive for substance use should receive a comprehensive
substance use assessment as part of obstetrical best practi-
ces.14Drug testing may be used to detect or confirm suspected
opioid and other drug use but should be performed only with
the patient’s consent and in compliance with state laws (See
ASAM’s Appropriate Use of Drug Testing in Clinical Addic-
tion Medicine guidance document). State laws differ in terms
of clinicians’ reporting requirements of identified drug use
(through either drug testing or self-report) to child welfare
services and/or health authorities. Laws that penalize pregnant
women for substance use disorders serve to prevent women
from obtaining prenatal care and treatment for opioid use
disorder, which may worsen outcomes for mother and child.
The American Congress College of Obstetricians and Gyne-
cologists (ACOG) recommends that ‘‘in states that mandate
reporting, policy makers, legislators, and physicians should
work together to retract punitive legislation and identify and
implement evidence-based strategies outside the legal system
to address the needs of women with addictions’’.133Routine
urine drug testing is not highly sensitive for many drugs and
may result in false-positive and negative results that are
misleading and potentially devastating for the patient. Even
with patient consent, urine testing should not be relied upon as
the sole or valid indication of drug use. They suggest that
positive urine screens should be followed with a definitive
drug assay. Similarly, in a study conducted on pregnant
women in Florida, where there is mandatory reporting to
health authorities, study authors identified that compliant
clinician reporting of drug misuse was biased by racial
ethnicity and socioeconomic status of the pregnant woman.
It was their conclusion that any state that regulates for
mandatory urine testing and reporting do so based on medical
criteria and medical necessity of such testing.131
For a pregnant patient with a history of addiction,
providers should be aware that the postpartum period is a
time of increased vulnerability. Therefore, assessment for
relapse risk, which may include drug testing with patient
consent, should be part of the postpartum visit.14
Imaging
Confirmation of a viable intrauterine pregnancy by
sonography is sometimes required before acceptance into
an OTP that is tailored specifically to pregnant women.
Imaging is also useful for confirmation of gestational age
and assessment of fetal weight if there is concern for fetal
growth abnormalities.
Psychosocial Assessment. Research has found that the major-
ity of women entering treatment for opioid use disorder have a
history of sexual assault, domestic violence, and/or adverse
childhood experiences. Therefore, obtaining a psychosocial
history is important when evaluating pregnant women for
opioid use disorder.132The psychosocial needs of pregnant
women being treated for opioid use disorder should be
assessed and patients should be offered or referred toWhite et el. /C15Adopted by the ASAM Board of Directors December 18, 2019
50 /C2232020 American Society of Addiction Medicine
Copyright © 2020 American Society of Addiction Medicine. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.psychosocial treatment based on their individual needs. A
woman’s decision to decline psychosocial treatment or the
absence of available psychosocial treatment should not pre-
clude or delay pharmacological treatment, with appropriate
medication management, during pregnancy. Motivational
interviewing or enhancement can be used to encourage
patients to engage in psychosocial treatment services appro-
priate for addressing their individual needs.
Opioid Agonist Treatment in Pregnancy. Decisions to use
opioid agonist medications in pregnant women with opioid
use disorder revolve around balancing the risks and benefits
to maternal and infant health. Opioid agonist treatment has
minimal long-term developmental impacts on children rela-
tive to harms resulting from ma t e r n a lu s eo fh e r o i no rm i s u s e
of prescription opioids. There is a risk of NOWS when opioid
agonists are used during pregnancy; however, there is no
evidence that methadone or buprenorphine taken for opioid
use disorder in pregnancy results in higher rates of NOWS
compared to illicit opioid use, and the risk of untreated opioid
use disorder to the woman and fetus is much higher than the
risk of NOWS. Therefore, women with opioid use disorder
who are not in treatment should be encouraged to start opioid
agonist treatment with methad one or buprenorphine as early
in the pregnancy as possible. Fu rthermore, pregnant women
who are on agonist treatment should be encouraged not to
discontinue treatment while they are pregnant or post-par-
tum, when they are at increased risk of relapse. Providers
should also counsel pregnant women who use nicotine that
reducing or stopping smoking can reduce the severity of
NOWS.133–138
Treatment Management Team. Pregnancy in women with
opioid use disorder should be managed by a clinician with
experience in both obstetrical care and treatment of opioid use
disorder or comanaged by a clinician with experience in
obstetrical care and another clinician experienced in the
treatment of opioid use disorder. Release of information forms
need to be completed to ensure communication among
healthcare providers.
Opioid Agonists Versus Withdrawal Management. Pregnant
women who are physically dependent on opioids should
receive treatment using agonist medications, in combination
with psychosocial treatment, rather than withdrawal manage-
ment or psychosocial treatment alone as these approaches
may pose a risk to the fetus. Furthermore, withdrawal man-
agement has been found to be inferior in effectiveness over
pharmacotherapy with opioid agonists and increases the risk
of relapse without fetal or maternal benefit.
Methadone Versus Buprenorphine. Providers should discuss
treatment options as well as risks and benefits with the patient
and document the decision in her chart. For women who are
pregnant or breastfeeding, opioid agonist treatment with
methadone or buprenorphine is the most appropriate treat-
ment, taking into consideration effects on the fetus, neonatal
abstinence syndrome, and impacts on perinatal care and
parenting of young children.There is a growing body of evidence comparing out-
comes related to methadone and buprenorphine treatment
during pregnancy.133Infants born to mothers treated with
buprenorphine had shorter hospital stays (10 vs. 17.5 days),
had shorter treatment durations for NOWS (4.1 vs. 9.9 days),
and required a lower cumulative dose of morphine (1.1 vs.
10.4 mg) compared to infants born to mothers on treatment
with methadone.134However, in this trial, mothers treated
with buprenorphine were more likely to drop out of treatment
compared to mothers treated with methadone. Larger studies
are needed comparing the safety and effectiveness of bupre-
norphine versus methadone in the obstetric population.
Buprenorphine Monoproduct versus Buprenorphine/Nalox-
one.While the evidence on the safety and efficacy of naloxone
in pregnant women remains limited,135,136the combination
buprenorphine/naloxone product is frequently used and the
consensus of the guideline committee is that the combination
product is safe and effective for this population. Naloxone is
minimally absorbed when these medications are taken
as prescribed.
Naltrexone in Pregnancy. There is insufficient research on the
safety and efficacy of naltrexone during pregnancy. If a
woman becomes pregnant while she is receiving naltrexone,
it may be appropriate to transition to methadone or bupre-
norphine, or to discontinue the medication if the patient and
doctor agree that the risk of relapse is low. A decision to
remain on naltrexone during pregnancy should be carefully
considered by the patient and their clinician and should
include a discussion on the paucity of information surround-
ing the risks (if any) of continued use of naltrexone. If the
patient wishes to remain on naltrexone, it is important to
obtain consent for ongoing treatment. If the patient decides to
discontinue treatment with naltrexone and they are at risk of
relapse, treatment with methadone or buprenorphine should
be considered.
Naloxone in Pregnancy. The use of an antagonist such as
naloxone to evaluate opioid dependence in pregnant women is
contraindicated because induced withdrawal may precipitate
preterm labor or fetal distress. Naloxone should be used in the
case of maternal overdose to save the woman’s life and can be
used in the combination buprenorphine/naloxone product for
opioid use disorder treatment as the naloxone is minimally
absorbed when taken as prescribed.
Methadone Initiation
Conception While in Treatment with Methadone. Conceiving
while on methadone has been associated with better drug
treatment outcomes compared to women who initiate metha-
done during pregnancy. Pregnant women in treatment with
methadone before conception who are not in physical with-
drawal can be continued on methadone as outpatients.
Timing of Treatment in Pregnancy. Treatment with methadone
should be initiated as early as possible during pregnancy to
produce the most optimal outcomes. Longer duration of/C15Adopted by the ASAM Board of Directors December 18, 2019 NPG for the Treatment of Opioid Use Disorder
/C2232020 American Society of Addiction Medicine 51
Copyright © 2020 American Society of Addiction Medicine. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.treatment with methadone is associated with longer gestation
and higher birth weight.134NOWS can occur as a result of
treatment with methadone but is easily treated. Patients should
be counseled related to this risk. The NOWS risk to the fetus is
significantly less than the risk of untreated opioid use disorder.
Data collected on exposure in human pregnancies are com-
plicated by confounding variables including drug, alcohol,
and cigarette use; poor maternal nutrition; and an increased
prevalence of maternal infection but there is no definitive
evidence of abnormal development in children exposed to
methadone in utero. Providers should also counsel pregnant
women who use nicotine that reducing or stopping smoking
can reduce the severity of NOWS.133
The optimum setting for initiation of treatment has not
been evaluated in this population. Hospitalization during
initiation of methadone may be advisable due to the potential
for adverse events (e.g., overdose and adverse drug interac-
tions), especially in the third trimester. The decision of
whether to hospitalize a patient for initiation of methadone
should consider the experience of the clinician as well as
comorbidities and other risk factors for the individual patient.
This is also an ideal time for the woman to be assessed by a
social worker and case manager, and to initiate prenatal care if
it has not been initiated earlier.
Methadone should be initiated at a dose range from 10
to 30 mg. Incremental doses of 5–10 mg can be given every
3–6 hours as needed to treat withdrawal symptoms, to a
maximum first day dose of 30–40 mg. After initiation, clini-
cians should increase the methadone dose by no more than
10 mg approximately every 5 days (e.g., 10 mg increases at
intervals of 5 days or 5 mg increases at intervals of 2–3 days
as symptoms persist), if indicated, to maintain the lowest dose
that controls withdrawal symptoms and minimizes the desire
to use additional opioids. Considerations should be given to
lowering the dose as clinically appropriate based on the
patient’s physiological response (e.g. sedation).
Buprenorphine Initiation. Initiation of buprenorphine may
lead to withdrawal symptoms in patients with physical depen-
dence on opioids. To minimize this risk, initiation should
begin when a woman shows objective, observable signs of
withdrawal, but before severe withdrawal symptoms are
evidenced. This usually occurs at least 6–12 hours after the
last dose of a short-acting opioid, and up to 24–48 hours after
the use of long-acting opioids. Hospitalization during initia-
tion of treatment with buprenorphine may be advisable due to
the potential for adverse events, especially in the third tri-
mester. The decision of whether to hospitalize a patient for
initiation of methadone should consider the experience of the
clinician as well as comorbidities and other risk factors for the
individual patient.
With the increasing prevalence of fentanyl, concerns
have been raised about whether the protocol for initiation onto
buprenorphine should be modified for patients regularly using
this or other high potency opioids. Fentanyl is short acting but
has a long half-life (8–10 hours) and a relatively high affinity
for the mu-opioid receptor. Some clinicians have recom-
mended waiting until patients are in at least moderate with-
drawal (COWS score of 13 or higher) before initiatingbuprenorphine. However, there is little existing evidence
addressing this issue.
Drug dosing is similar to that in women who are not
pregnant (see Part 5: Buprenorphine for more information).
Dosing of Opioid Agonists During Pregnancy
Methadone Dosing. In the second and third trimester, metha-
done doses may need to be increased due to increased
metabolism and circulating blood volume. With advancing
gestational age, plasma levels of methadone progressively
decrease and clearance increases.139–142The half-life of
methadone falls from an average of 22–24 hours in nonpreg-
nant women to 8.1 hours in pregnant women.143As a result,
increased and/or split methadone doses may be needed as
pregnancy progresses to maintain therapeutic effects. Split-
ting the methadone dose into two 12-hour doses may produce
more adequate treatment response in this period. A common
misconception is that that doses of methadone should
decrease as pregnancy progresses; however, data refute this
misconception. Refer to Part 4 for guidelines on appropriate
methadone initiation and titration including the risk for
overdose death. The risk and severity of NOWS are not
correlated with methadone doses taken by the mother at
the time of delivery and tapering of dose is not indi-
cated.144,145After birth, the dose of methadone will likely
need to be decreased (see Postpartum Treatment discussion
below).
Buprenorphine Dosing. The need to adjust dosing of bupre-
norphine during pregnancy is less common compared with
methadone. Clinicians may consider split dosing in patients
who complain of discomfort and craving in the afternoon and
evening. As with methadone, there is a risk of NOWS when
buprenorphine is used during pregnancy; however, there is no
evidence that buprenorphine taken for opioid use disorder in
pregnancy results in higher rates of NOWS compared to illicit
opioid use, and the risk of untreated opioid use disorder to the
woman and fetus is much higher than the risk of NOWS.
Buprenorphine treatment for pregnant women is associated
with less severe NOWS compared to methadone. Buprenor-
phine dose should be determined based on the clinical
response of the patient. The risk and severity of NOWS are
not known to be correlated with buprenorphine doses taken by
the mother at the time of delivery and tapering of dose is not
indicated. In addition, for pregnant women who use nicotine,
reducing or stopping smoking can reduce the severity of
NOWS.133,146
Postpartum Treatment. Pharmacological treatment for opioid
use disorder should be continue d following delivery. If the
dose of methadone was increas ed as pregnancy progressed
to maintain therapeutic effects, the dosage will likely need
to be reduced postpartum. Dosages should be titrated as
needed to prevent sedation. It is less common for pregnant
women to require dosage changes for buprenorphine. How-
ever, the patient should be monitored closely throughout
pregnancy and the postpartum period and dosages adjusted
as needed.130White et el. /C15Adopted by the ASAM Board of Directors December 18, 2019
52 /C2232020 American Society of Addiction Medicine
Copyright © 2020 American Society of Addiction Medicine. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.The postpartum period can be a vulnerable time for
women with opioid use disorder and research suggests that
women are more likely to relapse during this time than during
pregnancy. Women should routinely be screened for postpar-
tum depression and providers should regularly evaluate the
patient’s needs for different or additional psychosocial treat-
ments and support services.
Breastfeeding. Mothers receiving methadone or buprenor-
phine (including both the monoproduct and combination
product) for the treatment of opioid use disorders should
be encouraged to breastfeed in the absence of other contra-
indications. Guidelines from the Academy of Breastfeeding
Medicine encourage breastfeeding for women treated with
methadone who are enrolled in methadone programs.147Some
of the benefits include improved maternal-infant bonding and
favorable effects on NOWS.148,149It is not clear whether the
favorable effects of breastfeeding on NOWS are related to the
breast milk itself or the act of breastfeeding.149,150In a study
of buprenorphine and breastfeeding, it was shown that the
amount of buprenorphine metabolites secreted in breast milk
are so low that they pose little risk to breastfeeding infants.151
Insufficient research exists on the risks (if any) of
naltrexone for breastfeeding infants. There is limited data
indicating that naltrexone is minimally excreted into breast-
milk.152The decision to continue breastfeeding while taking
naltrexone should be based on a mother’s individual circum-
stances and preference. Clinicians should discuss this decision
with the mother including a discussion on the risk of relapse,
benefits of breastfeeding, and the risk to the infant of mini-
mum exposure to naltrexone, noting that the data are unclear
as to whether or not an actual risk exists. Consider monitoring
the infant for exposure. If the infant is being treated for NOWS
consider use of oral naltrexone instead of extended release
naltrexone since the treatment can be more rapidly adjusted if
there are signs of exposure.
Specialty advice should be sought for women with
concomitant physical illnesses or other substance use disor-
ders. Contraindications to breastfeeding include HIV-positive
mothers. In addition, precautions and tailored advice are
necessary for mothers who use alcohol, cocaine or amphet-
amine-type drugs.
Summary of Recommendations – Special
Populations: Pregnant Women
1.
 The first priority in evaluating pregnant women
for opioid use disorder should be to identify emergent or
urgent medical conditions that require immediate referral
for clinical evaluation.
2.
 Treatment with methadone or
buprenorphine is recommended and should be initiated
as early as possible during pregnancy.
3.
 Pregnant women who are physi-
cally dependent on opioids should receive treatment
using methadone or buprenorphine rather than with-
drawal management or psychosocial treatment alone.
4.
 A medical examination and psy-
chosocial assessment are recommended when evaluating
pregnant women for opioid use disorder. However,completion of all assessments should not delay or pre-
clude initiating pharmacotherapy for opioid use disorder.
If not completed before initiating treatment, assessments
should be completed as soon as possible thereafter.
5. Obstetricians and gynecologists, and other healthcare
providers that care for pregnant women, should be alert
to signs and symptoms of opioid use disorder. Pregnant
women with opioid use disorder are more likely to seek
prenatal care late in pregnancy, miss appointments, expe-
rience poor weight gain, or exhibit signs of withdrawal
or intoxication.
6.
 The psychosocial needs of preg-
nant women being treated for opioid use disorder should
be assessed and patients should be offered or referred to
psychosocial treatment based on their individual needs.
A woman’s decision to declin e psychosocial treatment
or the absence of availabl e psychosocial treatment
should not preclude or delay pharmacological treat-
ment, with appropriate medica tion management, during
pregnancy. Motivational interviewing or enhancement
can be used to encourage patients to engage in psycho-
social treatment services appropriate fo r addressing
their individual needs.
7. Counseling and testing for HIV should be provided (in
accordance with state law). Tests for hepatitis B and C
and liver enzymes are also suggested. Hepatitis A and B
vaccinations is recommended for those whose hepatitis
serology is negative.
8.
 Drug and alcohol testing should be
used to monitor patients for adherence to medication and
for use of illicit and controlled substances. This should be
done with informed consent from the mother, realizing
that there may be adverse legal and social consequences
for substance use. State laws differ on reporting sub-
stance use during pregnancy. Laws that penalize women
for substance use and for obtaining treatment serve to
prevent women from obtaining prenatal care and worsen
outcomes. For further clarity see The ASAM Appropriate
Use of Drug Testing in Clinical Addiction Medicine
guidance document.14
9.
 Care for pregnant women with
opioid use disorder should be comanaged by a clinician
experienced in obstetrical care and a clinician experi-
enced in the treatment of opioid use disorder.
10. Hospitalization during initiation of methadone or bupre-
norphine may be advisable due to the potential for
adverse events, especially in the third trimester.
11.
 Methadone should be initiated at a
dose range of 10–30 mg. Incremental doses of 5–10 mg is
recommended every 3–6 hours, as needed, to treat with-
drawal symptoms, to a maximum fist day dose of 30–40 mg.
12.
 After initiation, clinicians should
increase the methadone dose by no more than 10 mg
approximately every 5 days. The goal is to maintain the
lowest dose that controls withdrawal symptoms and
minimizes the desire to use additional opioids.
13.
 Clinicians should be aware that
the pharmacokinetics of methadone are affected by preg-
nancy. With advancing gestational age, plasma levels of/C15Adopted by the ASAM Board of Directors December 18, 2019 NPG for the Treatment of Opioid Use Disorder
/C2232020 American Society of Addiction Medicine 53
Copyright © 2020 American Society of Addiction Medicine. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.methadone progressively decrease and clearance
increases. Increased and/or split doses may be needed
as pregnancy progresses. Twice-daily dosing is more
effective and has fewer side effects than single dosing
but may not be practical because methadone is typically
dispensed in an OTP. After childbirth, doses may need to
be adjusted (typically reduced) based on changes in
weight and metabolism.
14.
 If a woman becomes pregnant
while she is receiving naltrexone, it may be appropriate
to discontinue the medication if the patient and clinician
agree that the risk of relapse is low. A decision to remain
on naltrexone during pregnancy should be carefully
considered by the patient and her clinician and should
include a discussion on the insufficiency of research on
risks (if any) of continued use of naltrexone. If the patient
chooses to discontinue treatment with naltrexone and is at
risk for relapse, treatment with methadone or buprenor-
phine should be considered.
15.
 Use of naloxone challenge (see
glossary) to test for opioid dependence and risk of
precipitated withdrawal is not recommended for pregnant
women with opioid use disorder.
16.
 Unless otherwise contraindicated
(see Part 8), mothers receiving methadone or buprenor-
phine for treatment of opioid use disorders should be
encouraged to breastfeed.
Areas for Further Research
1. Further research is needed on the safety of combination
buprenorphine/naloxone and new extended-release formu-
lations for use in pregnancy.
2. Further research is needed to investigate the safety of
naltrexone while pregnant or breastfeeding.
3. Further research is needed to determine what, if any,
clinical benefit there is to routinely drug testing pregnant
women.
4. Further research is needed on the comparative effective-
ness of inpatient versus outpatient settings for methadone
and buprenorphine initiation for pregnant women.
5. Further research is needed on best treatment approaches
for pregnant or breastfeeding women who cannot or will
not take medication for opioid use disorder.
PART 9: SPECIAL POPULATIONS: INDIVIDUALS
WITH PAIN
Background
The occurrence of acute and chronic pain among
patients with an opioid use disorder is not uncommon and
it is critical to manage pain safely and effectively. There are
three general scenarios (listed below), in which patients with
opioid use disorder could require pain care:
1. patients with an untreated and active opioid use disorder;
2. patients under opioid use disorder treatment with opioid
agonists;
3. patients under opioid use disorder treatment with naltrex-
one.General Considerations for All Patients With
Pain
For all patients with pain, it is important that the correct
diagnosis of pain etiology be made and that a suitable pain
treatment be identified. Nonpharmacological treatments (e.g.,
psychosocial treatments, physical therapy) have been shown
to be effective for many types of pain and should be consid-
ered.
If pharmacological treatment is considered, then non-
opioid analgesics such as acetaminophen and NSAIDs and
other medications with pain-modulating properties, such as
gabapentinoids, tricyclic antidepressants, norepinephrine-
serotonin reuptake inhibitors, and dissociative anesthetics
(e.g., ketamine) may be useful and should be considered first.
Additional non-opioid interventions such as regional anesthe-
sia should also be considered.
The presence or history of substance use disorder alone,
including opioid use disorder, should not preclude the use of
opioids to treat pain. Pain treatment should be coordinated
with the opioid use disorder treating clinician to help optimize
pain care (e.g., by using split rather than single daily doses of
buprenorphine or methadone to maximize the analgesic prop-
erties of these medications as discussed below) and reduce the
potential for relapse.
Pain Management in Patients with Opioid Use
Disorder
Methadone or buprenorphine may be considered for
patients with pain who have an active opioid use disorder but
are not undergoing treatment. Both methadone and buprenor-
phine have analgesic effects. Transition to opioid agonist
treatments can help comanage pain and opioid use disorder.
Methadone and Pain Management
Patients prescribed methadone for opioid use disorder
should receive pain management in the same way as other
patients, ideally through consultation with a clinician experi-
enced in pain care and their addiction treatment provider.
Acute and Chronic Pain Management
Temporarily increasing the methadone dose or dosing
frequency may be effective for managing pain. Splitting the
daily methadone dose across 3–4 doses per day can maximize
the analgesic properties of this medication. The withdrawal
and craving suppressing properties of methadone typically
last for 24–36 hours while its analgesic effects typically last
for 6–8 hours. As discussed in Part 4 of this guideline,
methadone has a long half-life and care should be taken to
avoid too rapid dose increases (refer to Part 4 for guidance on
titration).
If the patient has pain refractory to this and non-opioid
treatment strategies and requires additional opioid-based
analgesia, the addition of a short acting full-agonist opioid
can be considered to manage moderate to severe acute pain.153
The dose of additional full agonist opioid analgesic prescribed
is anticipated to be higher than the typical dose necessary to
achieve adequate analgesia in opioid-naı ¨ve individuals.154,155
Patients on methadone maintenance who have co-occurring
chronic pain should optimally be treated by a clinicianWhite et el. /C15Adopted by the ASAM Board of Directors December 18, 2019
54 /C2232020 American Society of Addiction Medicine
Copyright © 2020 American Society of Addiction Medicine. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.experienced in the treatment of pain in consultation with their
opioid treatment program.
Buprenorphine and Pain Management
Acute Pain Management
As a partial mu-opioid agonist, buprenorphine has
analgesic properties. Temporarily increasing buprenorphine
dosing and/or dividing the dose may be effective for acute
pain management. As discussed above, this split dosing
strategy better aligns the dosing with buprenorphine’s anal-
gesic properties. The analgesic effects of buprenorphine last
for approximately 6–8 hours while the withdrawal and crav-
ing suppressing properties last for approximately 24 hours.
When moving to split dosing the clinician should ensure that
the patient has not missed their last non-split dose. Increasing
the daily dose of buprenorphine by 20–25% and splitting it
into 3–4 doses can often adequately address acute pain.
Patients receiving buprenorphine for opioid use disorder
who have acute pain refractory to other treatments and require
additional opioid-based analgesia may also benefit from the
addition of as-needed doses of buprenorphine. Adding a short-
acting full agonist opioid to the patient’s regular dose of
buprenorphine can also be effective for managing severe acute
pain. The guideline committee recommends that this may be
considered in supervised settings, such as during hospitaliza-
tion. The dose of additional full agonist opioid analgesic
prescribed is anticipated to be higher than the typical dose
necessary to achieve adequate analgesia in opioid-naı ¨ve indi-
viduals. Because of a lack of evidence, the committee was
unable to come to consensus on whether this adjunct treatment
can be safely prescribed in ambulatory care settings. An
increased risk of relapse and overdose are the main concerns
when prescribing a full opioid receptor agonist for acute pain
care in individuals with opioid use disorder.
In situations when a full opioid agonist is needed for pain
management, discontinuation of buprenorphine is not required.
However, if the decision is made to discontinue buprenorphine
during the treatment of severe pain to allow for more mu opioid
receptor availability, patients should be monitored closely
because high doses of a full agonist may be required. As the
partial agonist effect dissipates, the full agonist effect may lead
to over-sedation and respiratory depression.
Chronic Pain Management
Split dosing of buprenorphine (with dosing every 6–
8 hours) may be adequate for chronic pain management in
many patients with opioid use disorder and chronic pain.
Chronic opioid therapy, especially at high doses, may
heighten pain sensitivity.155Some evidence suggests that
patients experiencing substantial pain on high doses of full
agonist opioids experience improved pain management when
transitioned to buprenorphine.156Overall, buprenorphine
therapy carries a lower risk of adverse effects, especially
overdose, compared to full agonist opioids.
Naltrexone and Pain Management
Patients on naltrexone may not respond to opioid
analgesics in the usual manner. Mild pain may be treatedwith non-opioid analgesics such as acetaminophen and
NSAIDs. High potency NSAIDs, such as Ketorolac, may
be prescribed for moderate to severe pain. The use of NSAIDs
should be time-limited due to risk of adverse effects,
including gastritis.
Emergency pain management options in patients taking
naltrexone, which may optimally be used in combination
when appropriate, include the following:
1. regional anesthesia;
2. conscious sedation with benzodiazepines or ketamine;
3. nonopioid options in general anesthesia;
4. over-riding the naltrexone blockade with high-potency
opioids.
Naltrexone’s blockade of the mu-opioid receptor can
also often be overcome, when necessary, with high potency
full agonist opioids.64Higher doses are typically needed to
override the opioid receptor blockade so this should be done in
an inpatient setting with monitoring of vitals. Use of high
potency opioids, with high affinity for the mu-opioid receptor,
administered intravenously is recommended in these cases.
Considerations for Surgery
Patients Treated with Methadone or
Buprenorphine
Discontinuation of methadone or buprenorphine before
surgery is not required. Higher-potency intravenous full ago-
nists opioids can be used perioperatively for analgesia in
addition to the patient’s regular dose of methadone or bupre-
norphine (except to the extent that doses may be skipped
during the NPO [nothing per orem] period before sur-
gery).156–158Discontinuation of methadone or buprenorphine
is also not recommended before elective cesarean section.
Since buprenorphine has a high affinity for the mu-
opioid receptor there were ini tially concerns th at full-opioid
a g o n i s t sw o u l dn o tb ee f f e c t i v ef o rt r e a t i n gp a i ni np a t i e n t s
taking this medication. However, research has demonstrated
that the addition of full-opioid agonists can be effective for
the treatment of pain in these patients.157,158Reducing the
dose of buprenorphine to provide more mu-opioid receptor
availability and increase the efficacy of full opioid agonists
co-administered with bupreno rphine has been suggested, but
there is insufficient research o n this topic. Decisions related
to discontinuing or adjusting the dose of buprenorphine
prior to a planned surgery should be made on an individual
basis, through consultation between the surgical and anes-
thesia teams and the addiction treatment provider when
possible.
If it is decided that buprenorphine or methadone
should be discontinued before a planned surgery, this may
occur the day before or the day of surgery, based on surgical
and anesthesia team recommendations. Higher-potency intra-
venous full agonists opioids can be used perioperatively for
analgesia. Methadone or buprenorphine can be resumed post-
operatively when the need for intravenous analgesia has
resolved, with additional considerations for post-operative
pain management as described for acute pain above. The
pre-surgery daily doses of these medications can be resumed/C15Adopted by the ASAM Board of Directors December 18, 2019 NPG for the Treatment of Opioid Use Disorder
/C2232020 American Society of Addiction Medicine 55
Copyright © 2020 American Society of Addiction Medicine. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.if they are withheld for a short period of time (up to 2–3 days).
If these medications are withheld for a longer period of time
they may need to be reinitiated gradually by the prescribing
clinician after the need for full opioid agonist analgesia has
resolved. For guidance on re-initiation and titration see Parts 4
and 5 of this guideline.
Patients Treated with Naltrexone
Oral naltrexone should be discontinued at least 72 hours
before elective surgery if pain management with opioids is
anticipated. Extended-release naltrexone should be stopped at
least 30 days before surgery, and oral naltrexone may be used
temporarily (until 72 hours prior to the planned surgery). The
surgical team should be aware of the use of naltrexone.
Patients should be off opioids for 3–7 days before resuming
naltrexone (oral or extended-release formulations). Re-initia-
tion of naltrexone should be coordinated with the opioid use
disorder treating clinician. See the naltrexone section for
recommendations related to initiation.
Summary of Recommendations – Special
Populations: Individuals With Pain
1.
 For all patients with pain, it is
important that the correct diagnosis is made and that
pain is addressed. Alternative treatments including non-
opioid medications with pain modulating properties,
behavioral approaches, physical therapy, and procedural
approaches (e.g., regional anesthesia) should be consid-
ered before prescribing opioid medications for pain.
2.
 If pharmacological treatment is
considered, non-opioid analgesics, such as acetamino-
phen and NSAIDs, and non-opioid medications with pain
modulating properties should be tried first.
3.
 For patients with pain who have an
active opioid use disorder but are not in treatment,
methadone or buprenorphine should be considered.
The patient’s opioid use disorder and pain should be
stabilized and managed concurrently.
4.
 For patients taking methadone or
buprenorphine for the treatment of opioid use disorder,
temporarily increasing the dose or dosing frequency (i.e.
split dosing to maximize the analgesic properties of these
medications) may be effective for managing pain. (Titra-
tion of methadone should follow the guidance in Part 4 of
this guideline)
5.
 For patients taking methadone for
the treatment of opioid use disorder who have acute pain
refractory to other treatments and require additional
opioid-based analgesia, adding a short acting full agonist
opioid to their regular dose of methadone can be consid-
ered to manage moderate to severe acute pain. The dose
of additional full agonist opioid analgesic prescribed is
anticipated to be higher than the typical dose necessary to
achieve adequate analgesia in opioid-naı ¨ve individuals.
6.
 Patients receiving buprenorphine for opioid use
disorder who have moderate to severe acute pain refrac-
tory to other treatments and require additional opioid-
based analgesia may benefit from the addition of as-
needed doses of buprenorphine.7.
 The addition of a short-acting full
agonist opioid to the patient’s regular dose of buprenorphine
can be effective for the management of severe acute pain in
supervised settings, such as during hospitalization. The dose
of additional full agonist opioid analgesic prescribed is
anticipated to be higher than the typical dose necessary
to achieve adequate analgesia in opioid-naı ¨ve individuals.
Because of a lack of evidence, the committee was unable to
come to consensus on whether this adjunct treatment can be
safely prescribed in ambulatory care settings.
8.
 Discontinuation of methadone or
buprenorphine before surgery is not required. Higher-
potency intravenous full agonists opioids can be used
perioperatively for analgesia.
9.
 Decisions related to discontinuing
or adjusting the dose of buprenorphine prior to a planned
surgery should be made on an individual basis, through
consultation between the surgical and anesthesia teams
and the addiction treatment provider when possible.
10.
 If it is decided that buprenorphine
or methadone should be discontinued before a planned
surgery, this may occur the day before or the day of
surgery, based on surgical and anesthesia team recom-
mendations. Higher-potency intravenous full agonists
opioids can be used perioperatively for analgesia. Meth-
adone or buprenorphine can be resumed post-operatively
when the need for full opioid agonist analgesia has
resolved, with additional considerations for post-opera-
tive pain management as described for acute pain above.
The initial dose and titration should typically be deter-
mined by the prescriber. In general, pre-surgery daily
doses of these medications can be resumed if they were
withheld for less than 2–3 days.
11.
 Patients on naltrexone may not
respond to opioid analgesics in the usual manner. There-
fore, it is recommended that mild pain be treated with
non-opioid analgesics, and moderate to severe pain be
treated with higher potency NSAIDs (e.g. ketorolac) on a
short-term basis.
12.
 Oral naltrexone should be discon-
tinued 72 hours before surgery and extended-release
injectable naltrexone should be discontinued 30 days
before an anticipated surgery. (Reinitiation of naltrexone
should follow the guidance in Part 6 of this guideline)
13.
 Naltrexone’s blockade of the mu opioid receptor
can often be overcome when necessary with high potency
full agonist opioids. In these instances, patients should be
closely monitored in an emergency department or
hospital setting.
Areas For Further Research
1. Research on optimal acute and chronic pain management
strategies for patients on medications for opioid use
disorder.
2. Studies on the safety and effectiveness of adding full
agonist opioid analgesics to the patient’s baseline bupre-
norphine dose in non-acute care settings are needed.
3. Further research is needed on chronic pain management
for patients with opioid use disorder.White et el. /C15Adopted by the ASAM Board of Directors December 18, 2019
56 /C2232020 American Society of Addiction Medicine
Copyright © 2020 American Society of Addiction Medicine. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.4. Research on pain management in pregnant women on
medications for opioid use disorder during delivery.
PART 10: SPECIAL POPULATIONS:
ADOLESCENTS
Background
The American Academy of Pediatrics categorizes ado-
lescence as the totality of three developmental stages (early-,
middle- and late-adolescence) —puberty to adulthood —
which occur generally between 11 and 21 years of age.1
Adolescents present for treatment with a broad spectrum of
opioid use disorder severity and with a range of co-occurring
medical and psychiatric illnesses. Consequently, clinicians
will need to respond with a full range of treatment options,
including pharmacotherapy. However, limited evidence exists
regarding the efficacy of pharmacotherapies for opioid with-
drawal management or opioid use disorder in adolescents.159
Pharmacological therapies have primarily been developed
through research with adult populations.160
The treatment of adolescents with opioid use disorder
presents many unique medical, legal, and ethical dilemmas
that may complicate treatment. Given these unique issues,
adolescents with opioid use disorder often benefit from
services designed specifically for them. Furthermore, the
family should be involved in treatment whenever possible.
Confidentiality in Treatment
One issue of particular importance to consider in the
treatment of adolescents is confidentiality. Adolescents have
reported that they are less likely to seek substance use disorder
treatment if services are not confidential.161Confidential care,
particularly with respect to sensitive issues such as reproduc-
tive health and substance use, has become a well-established
practice.162,163This is a subject of complexity as it is an area
governed by both Federal and state laws. Moreover, defined
age ranges of adolescence vary. A myriad of clinical and legal
responsibilities may be evoked if confronted by a young
person’s request for confidentiality. More than half of the
states in the U.S., by law, permit adolescents under 18 years of
age to consent to substance use disorder treatment without
parental consent. Collaboration with families, including
shared information and decision making, should be pursued
with the adolescent’s consent. Providers will also sometimes
need to make decisions based on best medical judgement
about disclosure without adolescent consent for safety con-
cerns to address imminent danger. State law should also be
consulted. An additional reference source in decision-making
regarding the implications on coordination of care, effective-
ness of treatment without parental communication, and more
are fully discussed in a SAMHSA’s Treatment Improvement
Protocol (TIP) #33.164
Pharmacotherapy Options for Adolescents
Opioid agonists (methadone and buprenorphine) and
antagonists (naltrexone) may be considered for treatment of
opioid use disorder in adolescents. However, efficacy studies
for these medications have largely been conducted in adults.
This recommendation is based largely on the consensusopinion of the Guideline Committee. Limited data are avail-
able comparing the relative effectiveness of these treatments
in adolescents.
Opioid Agonists: Methadone and
Buprenorphine
Buprenorphine has been approved by the FDA for the
treatment of patients aged 16 years and older. When pre-
scribed outside of opioid treatment programs, through a
waiver, federal law does not limit the prescription of bupre-
norphine to adolescent patients based on their age. There is no
evidence to suggest that there are major safety concerns
conveyed by younger age.
Methadone is approved for the treatment of patients
who are aged 18 years and older. Federal regulations for
opioid treatment programs (42 CFR 8.12) allow for metha-
done and buprenorphine (when not prescribed pursuant to a
DATA 2000 waiver) to be provided for patients under 18 who
have a documented history of at least two prior unsuccessful
withdrawal management attempts, and have parental con-
sent.42
Efficacy Research on Agonists and Partial
Agonists in Adolescents
There are no controlled trials evaluating methadone for
the treatment of opioid use disorder in adolescents under the
age of 18. Descriptive trials support the usefulness of treat-
ment with methadone in supporting treatment retention in
adolescent with heroin use disorder.165The usefulness of
treatment with buprenorphine has been demonstrated in
two RCTs. Studies have, however, not included adolescents
under the age of 16.166,167Buprenorphine is not FDA-
approved for use in patients less than 16 years old. Bupre-
norphine is more likely to be available in programs targeting
older adolescents and young adults. No direct comparison of
the efficacy of buprenorphine versus methadone has been
conducted in adolescent populations.
Opioid Antagonist: Naltrexone
Extended release naltrexone has been approved by the
FDA for the treatment of patients aged 18 years and older.
Naltrexone does not induce physical dependence and is easier
to discontinue. Some small studies have demonstrated the
efficacy of extended-release injectable naltrexone in adoles-
cents and young adults.75,168The safety, efficacy, and phar-
macokinetics of extended-release injectable naltrexone have
not been established in the adolescent population, although
there is no evidence to suggest that younger age should convey
major safety risks.
Psychosocial Treatment for Adolescents
Psychosocial treatment is recommended in the treat-
ment of adolescents with opioid use disorder. Recommended
treatments based on the consensus opinion of the Guideline
Committee include family intervention approaches, educa-
tional or vocational support, and behavioral interventions to
incrementally reduce use. Adolescent group counseling can
cause unintended (iatrogenic) effects as group members can
‘‘reinforce drug use and thereby derail the purpose of the/C15Adopted by the ASAM Board of Directors December 18, 2019 NPG for the Treatment of Opioid Use Disorder
/C2232020 American Society of Addiction Medicine 57
Copyright © 2020 American Society of Addiction Medicine. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.therapy’’ according to the National Institute on Drug Abuse and
should be carefully considered.75Holistic risk-reduction inter-
ventions, including naloxone distribution; education on over-
dose prevention; safe injection practices; risky behavior
modification; and contraception access (including the option
of long-acting reversible contraception); etc., should be con-
sidered and incorporated into an adolescent patient’s treatment
plan as appropriate. Treatment of co-occurring psychiatric
conditions is also especially important in this population.
Adolescents often benefit from specialized treatment programs
that provide multiple services. The risk benefit balance of
pharmacological treatment without concurrent psychosocial
treatment should be carefully considered and discussed with
the patient and their parent or guardian as appropriate. While a
patient’s decision to decline psychosocial treatment or the
absence of available psychosocial treatment should not pre-
clude or delay pharmacological treatment of opioid use disor-
der (with appropriate medication management), motivational
interviewing or enhancement should be used to encourage
patients to engage in psychosocial treatment services appropri-
ate for addressing their individual needs.
Summary of Recommendations – Special
Populations: Adolescents
1. Clinicians should consider treating adolescents who have
opioid use disorder using the full range of treatment
options, including pharmacotherapy.
2.
 Opioid agonists (methadone and
buprenorphine) and antagonists (naltrexone) may be con-
sidered for treatment of opioid use disorder in adoles-
cents.91Federal laws and FDA approvals should be
considered when recommending pharmacotherapy for
adolescent patients.
3.
 Psychosocial treatment is recom-
mended in the treatment of adolescents with opioid use
disorder. The risk benefit balance of pharmacological
treatment without concurrent psychosocial treatment
should be carefully considered and discussed with the
patient and her or his parent or guardian as appropriate.
A patient’s decision to decline psychosocial treatment or
the absence of available psychosocial treatment should not
preclude or delay pharmacological treatment of opioid use
disorder, with appropriate medication management. Moti-
vational interviewing or enhancement can be used to
encourage patients to engage in psychosocial treatment
services appropriate for addressing their individual needs.
4.
 Concurrent practices to reduce
infection (e.g., risk behavior reduction interventions) are
recommended as components of comprehensive treatment
for the prevention of blood-borne viruses (infections related
to injection practices) and sexually transmitted infections.
5. Adolescents may benefit from treatment in specialized
treatment programs that provide multidimensional ser-
vices (See The ASAM Criteria guidelines).2
Areas for Further Research
1. Further studies are needed to examine the efficacy of
pharmacotherapy for adolescents with opioid use disorder.
Due to the few clinical trials in adolescents, most ofthe current recommendations are based on research with
adults.
2. Further research is needed to identify which psychosocial
treatments, alone and in combination with pharmacother-
apy, are best suited for use with adolescents.
3. More longitudinal studies are needed to determine treat-
ment factors (e.g., treatment modality, length of treatment,
treatment settings) associated with positive long-term out-
comes for adolescents with OUD.
PART 11: SPECIAL POPULATIONS:
INDIVIDUALS WITH CO-OCCURRING
PSYCHIATRIC DISORDERS
Background
Co-occurring psychiatric disorders are common among
individuals who have opioid use disorder. Epidemiological
studies have demonstrated a higher prevalence of substance
use among people with psychiatric disorders relative to the
general population.169Reasons for the association between
psychiatric and substance use disorders may include (1) that
the dual diagnoses result from risk factors that are common to
both disorders (e.g. adverse childhood experiences), (2)
shared genetic vulnerability that contributes to the dysregu-
lation in dopamine and glutamate systems in psychiatric and
substance use disorders,170,171and (3) substances may be used
as a method of self-medication among patients with psychi-
atric disorders.172–174
Co-occurring psychiatric disorders should not bar
patients from opioid use disorder treatment. The presence
of the following common psychiatric disorders should be
evaluated in patients presenting with possible opioid use
disorder:
1. depression;
2. anxiety;
3. personality disorders;
4. post-traumatic stress disorder.
Assessment of Psychiatric Co-occurrence
The assessment of psychiatric disorders is critical when
attempting to place patients in the appropriate treatment.
Hospitalization may be appropriate for patients with severe
or unstable psychiatric symptoms that may compromise the
safety of self or others. An initial patient assessment should
determine whether the patient is stable. Patients with suicidal
or homicidal ideation should be referred immediately for
treatment and possibly hospitalization. Patients should also
be assessed for signs or symptoms of acute psychosis and
chronic psychiatric disorders.
An assessment including medical history, physical
examination, and an assessment of mental health status
and/or psychiatric disorder should occur at the beginning
of agonist or antagonist treatment (see Part 1: Assessment
and Diagnosis of Opioid Use Disorder). However, completion
of all assessments should not delay or preclude initiating
pharmacotherapy for opioid use disorder. If not completed
before initiating treatment, assessments should be completedWhite et el. /C15Adopted by the ASAM Board of Directors December 18, 2019
58 /C2232020 American Society of Addiction Medicine
Copyright © 2020 American Society of Addiction Medicine. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.as soon as possible thereafter. Reassessment using a detailed
mental status examination should occur after stabilization
with methadone, buprenorphine, or naltrexone.
Co-occurring Psychiatric Disorders and Suicide
Risk
Psychiatric disorders and substance use disorders are
both strongly associated with increased risk for suicide.175
More than 90% of patients who attempt suicide have a major
psychiatric disorder.176In cases where suicide attempts
resulted in death, 95% of patients had a psychiatric diagno-
sis.177
Management of a suicidal patient should include the
following:
1. Reduce immediate risk.
2. Manage underlying factors associated with suicidal intent.
3. Monitor and follow-up.
Considerations with Specific Psychiatric
Disorders
Depression or Bipolar Disorder
Antidepressant therapy may be initiated with pharma-
cotherapy for opioid use disorder for patients with symptoms
of depression. Patients presenting with mania should be
evaluated to determine whether symptoms arise from the
bipolar disorder or substance use. Patients with bipolar disor-
der may require additional psychiatric care, hospitalization,
and/or treatment with prescription mood stabilizers.
All patients with depression, including bipolar disorder,
should be asked about suicidal ideation and behavior. Patients
with a history of suicidal ideation or attempts should have
their medication use monitored regularly, including medica-
tions for the treatment of opioid use disorder and psychiatric
medications.
Schizophrenia
Antipsychotic medication may be initiated with phar-
macotherapy for opioid use disorder for patients with schizo-
phrenia or other psychotic disorders. Coadministration of
antipsychotic medications with opioid agonist pharmacother-
apy or use of long-acting depot formulations of antipsychotic
medications is an option to consider in patients with histories
of medication nonadherence.
All patients with schizophrenia should be asked about
suicidal ideation and behavior. Patients with a history of
suicidal ideation or attempts should have their medication
use monitored regularly. This includes medications for the
treatment of opioid use disorder and psychiatric medications.
For patients with schizophrenia and co-occurring opioid
use disorder who have a recent history of, or are at risk of
repeated hospitalization or homelessness, assertive commu-
nity treatment (ACT) should be considered. ACT is designed
to provide treatment, rehabilitation, and support services to
individuals who are diagnosed with severe psychiatric dis-
orders, and whose needs have not been well met by more
traditional psychiatric or psychosocial services. The efficacyof ACT has had mixed results on substance use disorder
outcomes, but has shown benefit in preventing homeless-
ness.178–180When ACT or another intensive case manage-
ment programs are unavailable, traditional case management
can be helpful to patients who are unable to manage necessary,
basic tasks.
Co-occurring Psychiatric Disorders and Agonist
Treatment
Pharmacological and conjunctive psychosocial treat-
ments should be considered for patients with both an opioid
use disorder and a psychiatric disorder. Suicidal patients
should be hospitalized. Agonist treatment could be initiated
in the inpatient setting following stabilization. Patients at risk
for suicide should not be given take-home doses if started on
agonist treatment medication unless the risk/benefit ratio is
clearly justified.
Methadone
Methadone for the treatment of opioid use disorder has
been found to reduce psychiatric distress in a few weeks.
Psychotherapy has been found useful in patients who have
moderate to severe psychiatric disorders.
Buprenorphine
Psychiatrically stable patients are good candidates for
buprenorphine. Patients with depression who are receiving
treatment with buprenorphine require a higher level of moni-
toring. The extended-release injectable and implantable
buprenorphine formulations may be useful in patients with
a co-occurring psychiatric disorder who may not be able to
adhere well to daily oral dosing.
Co-occurring Psychiatric Disorders and
Antagonist Treatment
Psychiatrically stable patients are candidates for treat-
ment with extended-release injectable naltrexone. There are
little data, however, regarding the relative efficacy of naltrex-
one in opioid-dependent patients with co-occurring psychiat-
ric disorders. The once-monthly injections of extended-
release injectable naltrexone may be useful in patients with
a co-occurring psychiatric disorder who may not be able to
adhere well to daily oral dosing. Patients should be closely
observed for adverse events as some patients have reported
suicidal ideation, suicide attempts, and depression.
Summary of Recommendations – Special
Populations: Individuals With Co-occurring
Psychiatric Disorders
1.
 A comprehensive assessment
including determination of mental health status and sui-
cide risk should be used to evaluate whether the patient is
stable. Patients with suicidal or homicidal ideation should
be referred immediately for treatment and possibly hospi-
talization.
2. Management of patients at risk for suicide should include
reducing immediate risk, managing underlying factors
associated with suicidal intent, and monitoring and fol-
low-up./C15Adopted by the ASAM Board of Directors December 18, 2019 NPG for the Treatment of Opioid Use Disorder
/C2232020 American Society of Addiction Medicine 59
Copyright © 2020 American Society of Addiction Medicine. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.3.
 All patients with psychiatric disor-
ders should be asked about suicidal ideation and behavior.
Patients with a history of suicidal ideation or attempts
should have adherence for opioid use disorder and psychi-
atric disorder medications monitored more closely.
4.
 Assessment for psychiatric disorder
should occur at the onset of agonist or antagonist treat-
ment. However, completion of all assessments should not
delay or preclude initiating pharmacotherapy for opioid
use disorder. If not completed before initiating treatment,
assessments should be completed as soon as possible
thereafter. Reassessment using a detailed mental status
examination should occur after stabilization with metha-
done, buprenorphine, or naltrexone.
5.
 Pharmacotherapy in conjunction
with psychosocial treatment should be offered to patients
with opioid use disorder and a co-occurring psychiatric
disorder. A patient’s decision to decline psychosocial
treatment or the absence of available psychosocial treat-
ment should not preclude or delay pharmacological treat-
ment of opioid use disorder, with appropriate mediation
management. Motivational interviewing or enhancement
can be used to encourage patients to engage in psychoso-
cial treatment services appropriate for addressing their
individual needs.
6. Clinicians should be aware of potential interactions
between medications used to treat co-occurring psychiat-
ric conditions and opioid use disorder.
7. Assertive community treatment should be considered for
patients with co-occurring schizophrenia and opioid use
disorder who have a recent history of, or are at risk of,
repeated hospitalization or homelessness.
Areas for Further Research
1. Implementation research is needed to determine best
practices for assessing, diagnosing, and treating co-occur-
ring psychiatric disorders for patients with opioid use
disorder in diverse treatment settings.
2. More longitudinal research is needed to better understand
how co-occurring psychiatric disorders affect long-term
prognosis for opioid use disorder remission, and how risks
for both opioid use disorder and psychiatric condition
relapse can be anticipated and mitigated.
3. More research is needed on how to improve access and
linkage to psychiatric care for patients with co-occurring
opioid use disorder.
PART 12: SPECIAL POPULATIONS:
INDIVIDUALS IN THE
CRIMINAL JUSTICE SYSTEM
Background
A substantial proportion of justice involved individuals
– including those in prisons, jails, drug courts, or under
community supervision – have opioid use disorder. A history
of incarceration is common among people who inject drugs;
56–90% of people who inject drugs have been incarcerated
previously.181The United States leads the world in the number
of people incarcerated in Federal and state correctionalfacilities. At the end of 2017, there were an estimated 1.5
million people in prison under state or Federal jurisdiction.182
In all, 6.7 million people in the United States are under
correctional control (prison policy initiative, 2018).183
Approximately one quarter of those held in the U.S. criminal
justice system have been convicted of a drug offense.184
Continued drug use is common among people in prison,
and many individuals initiate injection drug use while in
prison.185
Drug use in prison is particularly risky because of the
environment. The high concentration of at-risk individuals,
the stress of incarceration, loss of tolerance following with-
drawal, and general overcrowding can increase the risk of
adverse consequences associated with drug use, including
violence, overdose and overdose deaths, suicide, and self-
harm.186Sterile injection equipment is rare and sharing
needles is common, leading to a high risk of contracting
and spreading HIV and hepatitis C. Discharge from prison is
associated with a high risk for opioid overdose and death.187
Consequently, it is important to identify and implement
effective treatments for justice involved individuals and effec-
tively coordinate transitions to community care.
For the purposes of this Practice Guideline , a prison is
to be differentiated from a jail. At the most basic level, the
fundamental difference between jail and prison is the length of
stay for inmates. Jails are usually run by local law enforce-
ment and/or local government agencies and designed to hold
inmates awaiting trial or serving a short sentence. Prison terms
are of longer duration. Opioid use disorder treatment should
not be discontinued when individuals become incarcerated.
Federal law requires that incarcerated individuals be
treated for health problems since they have no other way to
access medical care. Thus, individuals with hypertension,
COPD, diabetes, HIV , wound infections, schizophrenia, and
other serious health problems receive treatment while incar-
cerated. Addiction treatment, with few exceptions, has his-
torically been excluded from the range of services provided in
U.S. correctional facilities. However, as addiction is increas-
ingly recognized as a serious health problem for which there
are effective medications, there is growing pressure for jails
and prisons to treat this disease, as is required for other
health conditions.
Effectiveness of Pharmacotherapy
Pharmacotherapy can effectively treat opioid use disor-
der among incarcerated individuals. All FDA approved med-
ications for the treatment of opioid use disorder should be
available to patients within the criminal justice system. The
treatment plan, including choice of medication, should be
based on the patient’s individual clinical needs. Most research
on the effectiveness of pharmacotherapy for the treatment of
opioid use disorder among incarcerated individuals has
focused on methadone. However, there is growing evidence
supporting the use of buprenorphine and extended-release
naltrexone in this population.188A randomized controlled trial
of methadone in conjunction with counseling compared with
counseling alone found that in the year following release from
jail, those who were treated with methadone and counseling
spent 7 times as many days in treatment for substance useWhite et el. /C15Adopted by the ASAM Board of Directors December 18, 2019
60 /C2232020 American Society of Addiction Medicine
Copyright © 2020 American Society of Addiction Medicine. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.disorder during the post-release year compared with those
who had counseling alone. None of the counseling-only
participants continued in treatment for the entire year, com-
pared to 37 percent of the methadone participants. The
counseling-only individuals were also significantly more
likely to test positive for opioids 12 months post-release.189
A recent 2019 systematic review and meta-analysis (pub-
lished after the RAM rating process and presented here as
additional supporting material) found that among 807 inmates
(within prisons and jails), methadone treatment during incar-
ceration increased community treatment engagement,
reduced illicit opioid use and reduced injection drug use
post-release.190The same systematic review found that bupre-
norphine and naltrexone were as effective as methadone in
reducing illicit opioid use post-release.191
Treatment with methadone or buprenorphine while
incarcerated results in significant reductions in deaths from
overdose in the weeks and months following release from
prison.192,193Correctional personnel should collaborate with
community-based treatment providers to ensure seamless
continuity of pharmacotherapy and psychosocial treatment
upon re-entry. A retrospective analysis of data from the Rhode
Island Office of State Medical Examiners found that among
recently incarcerated individuals, there was a 60.5% reduction
in deaths resulting from a drug overdose in 2017 compared
with 2016 following introduction of a new model for screen-
ing and treating incarcerated individuals with opioid use
disorder within the Rhode Island Department of Corrections
prison/jail system.192The number of individuals needed to be
treated to prevent one death from overdose was 11.192
Naloxone kits should be available within correctional
facilities. At-risk individuals and their families should be
educated in how to administer naloxone, and all individuals
with opioid use disorder should be offered naloxone kits upon
release from the facility.194
Methadone
Treatment with methadone has been shown to have
several beneficial effects for incarcerated individuals with
opioid use disorders. Individuals treated with methadone
inject less drugs, use less drugs after release, and are more
likely to participate in community-based addiction treat-
ment.185,195–197Treatment with methadone lowered the rate
of reincarceration during the 3-year period following first
incarceration.197,198Importantly, forced withdrawal from
methadone treatment during incarceration reduces the likeli-
hood of individuals re-engaging in treatment post-
release.199,200
Buprenorphine
As noted, buprenorphine has also been associated with
beneficial effects in individuals in prison with opioid use
disorder. An RCT comparing buprenorphine and methadone
among men who use heroin who were newly admitted to
prison showed that treatment completion rates were similar,
but that patients taking buprenorphine were significantly more
likely to enter community-based treatment after release.201In
a more recent trial, buprenorphine initiated in prison was also
associated with a greater likelihood of entering communitytreatment.189,192However, buprenorphine was diverted in
some cases. Recent approval of new extended-release bupre-
norphine formulations can help to address this by reducing the
risk of diversion.
Naltrexone
Extended-release injectable naltrexone has been shown
to be effective for relapse prevention in some trials conducted
in criminal justice settings. A 24-week trial comparing
extended-release naltrexone with usual care in the form of
brief counseling and referrals for community treatment pro-
grams found that treatment with extended-release naltrexone
was more effective than usual care in preventing opioid
relapse among individuals in the criminal justice system with
a history of opioid use disorder and a preference for opioid
free treatment.119In a small pilot trial involving individuals on
parole with prior opioid use disorder, 6 months of treatment
with extended-release injectable naltrexone was associated
with fewer opioid-positive urine drug screens and a reduced
likelihood of reincarceration.202Further research is needed to
determine the comparative effectiveness of extended-release
naltrexone with methadone and extended-release buprenor-
phine for the treatment of opioid use disorder within the
criminal justice setting.
Treatment Options
All justice-involved individuals, regardless of type of
offense or disposition, should be screened for opioid use
disorder and considered for initiation or continuation of
medication for the treatment of opioid use disorder. Patients
with opioid use disorder not in treatment should be assessed
and offered individualized pharmacotherapy and psychosocial
treatment as appropriate. All FDA approved medications for
the treatment of opioid use disorder should be available to
patients within the criminal justice system and the treatment
plan, including choice of medications, should be based on the
patient’s individual clinical needs.
Individuals entering the criminal justice system should
not be subject to forced opioid withdrawal nor forced to
transition from agonist (methadone or buprenorphine) to
antagonist (naltrexone) treatment. If opioid withdrawal does
occur, the patient should be provided withdrawal management
services. Patients being treated for opioid use disorder at the
time of entrance into the criminal justice system should
continue their treatment. Criminal justice staff should coor-
dinate care and access to pharmacotherapy to avoid interrup-
tion in treatment.
Risk for relapse and overdose is particularly high in the
weeks immediately following release from prison and jails.
Patients being treated for opioid use disorder while in prison
or jail should be stabilized on pharmacotherapy and continued
on treatment after their release. Continuation of treatment
after release results in a substantial reduction in all-cause and
overdose mortality. Incarcerated individuals with a history of
opioid use disorder who are not receiving pharmacological
treatment should be assessed for relapse risk prior to reentry.
Medications should be initiated a minimum of 30 days before
release, and aftercare should be arranged in advance.203
Patient care on reentry to the community should be/C15Adopted by the ASAM Board of Directors December 18, 2019 NPG for the Treatment of Opioid Use Disorder
/C2232020 American Society of Addiction Medicine 61
Copyright © 2020 American Society of Addiction Medicine. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.individualized and coordinated with treatment providers in the
community.194
Methadone and Buprenorphine
For patients without contraindications, treatment for
opioid use disorder with either methadone or buprenorphine
during incarceration should be continued after release. For
individuals who have been tapered off medication, restart
methadone or buprenorphine with rapid transition to follow-
up care after reentry. Limited research is available comparing
methadone and buprenorphine treatment in the prison popu-
lation. A 2009 trial found no post-release differences between
the buprenorphine and methadone groups in self-reported
relapse to illicit opioid use, self-reported rearrests, self-
reported severity of crime or reincarceration. The buprenor-
phine group reported for their post-release treatment in the
community more often than did the methadone treatment
group.201As described above, a 2019 systematic review found
that buprenorphine was as effective as methadone in reducing
illicit opioid use post-release in prison and jail settings.190
Naltrexone
Extended-release injectable naltrexone may be consid-
ered to prevent relapse among criminal justice involved
individuals with a history of opioid use disorder for patients
with no contraindications, during incarceration or before
release from prison or jail. Further research is needed on
the comparative effectiveness of extended-release injectable
naltrexone compared with buprenorphine or methadone for
the treatment of individuals in the criminal justice system with
opioid use disorder.
Summary of Recommendations – Special
Populations: Individuals in the Criminal Justice
System
1.
 All FDA approved medications for the treatment
of opioid use disorder should be available to individuals
receiving healthcare within the criminal justice system.
The treatment plan, including choice of medication,
should be based on the patient’s individual clinical needs.
2.
 Continuation of treatment after
release results in a substantial reduction in all-cause and
overdose mortality. Treatment should be individualized,
and patients should receive complete information to make
informed decisions in consultation with a medical and
treatment team.
3.
 Individuals entering the criminal justice system
should not be subject to forced opioid withdrawal. Patients
being treated for opioid use disorder at the time of
entrance into the criminal justice system should continue
their treatment. Patients with opioid use disorder who are not
in treatment should be assessed and offered individualized
pharmacotherapy and psychosocial treatment as appropriate.
4.
 Initiation or maintenance of phar-
macotherapy for the treatment of opioid use disorder is
recommended for individuals within the criminal
justice system (including both jails and prisons). Criminal
justice staff should coordinate care and access to pharma-
cotherapy to avoid interruption in treatment. Patientsshould not be forced to transition from agonist (methadone
or buprenorphine) to antagonist (naltrexone) treatment.
5.
 Individuals in the criminal justice
system who have opioid use disorder or who are experienc-
ing opioid withdrawal should be offered a combination of
pharmacotherapy and psychosocial treatment (based on an
assessment of their individual psychosocial needs). A
patient’s decision to decline psychosocial treatment or
the absence of available psychosocial treatment should
not preclude or delay pharmacological treatment of opioid
use disorder, with appropriate medication management.
Motivational interviewing or enhancement can be used to
encourage patients to engage in psychosocial treatment
services appropriate for addressing their individual needs.
6.
 If an OTP is not accessible, providers may need to
transition individuals from methadone to buprenorphine.
Effectively transitioning from methadone to buprenor-
phine can be challenging but can be achieved safely if
managed by a provider experienced in the procedure.
7.
 Risk for relapse and overdose is
particularly high in the weeks immediately following
release from prison and jails. Patients being treated for
opioid use disorder while in prison or jail should be
stabilized on pharmacotherapy (methadone, buprenor-
phine or naltrexone) and continue in treatment after their
release. Patient care on reentry to the community should be
individualized and coordinated with treatment providers in
the community.
8.
 Naloxone kits should be available within correc-
tional facilities. Individuals with opioid use disorder
should receive a naloxone kit prior to release, and indi-
viduals and families should be educated in how to
administer naloxone.
Areas for Further Research
1. Further research is needed to identify organizational and
patient-level factors influencing real-world effectiveness
of pharmacotherapy delivered in jails and prisons.
2. Research is needed to assess the impact of extended-
release naltrexone with or without psychosocial treatment
on mortality in justice involved individuals.
3. Comparative effectiveness research is needed comparing
extended-release naltrexone with methadone and buprenor-
phine (including extended-release buprenorphine) for the
treatment of opioid use disorder in justice involved pop-
ulations, particularly the comparative impact on mortality.
4. More research is needed on best practices for coordinating
and ensuring ongoing access to opioid use disorder treat-
ment upon reentry.
PART 13: NALOXONE FOR THE PREVENTION
OF OPIOID OVERDOSE DEATH
Introduction
Death from opioid overdose is an epidemic in the U.S.
Poisoning deaths involving opioid analgesics more than tripled
in the U.S. since 1999.204Unintentional poisoning (primarily
due to drug overdose) is now the leading cause of injury-related
death among Americans aged 25–64, having surpassed motorWhite et el. /C15Adopted by the ASAM Board of Directors December 18, 2019
62 /C2232020 American Society of Addiction Medicine
Copyright © 2020 American Society of Addiction Medicine. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.vehicle accidents in 2009.205Patients who overdose on opioids
are in a life-threatening situation that requires immediate
medical intervention. Naloxone is a mu-opioid antagonist with
well-established safety and efficacy that can reverse opioid
overdose and prevent fatalities. Fentanyl and its analogs are
becoming increasingly prevalent in the drug supply. These
highly potent opioids often require higher doses of naloxone,
and due to naloxone’s short half-life, requires monitoring and
often requires administering multiple doses.
As of June 2017, all 50 states and the District of
Columbia had passed legislation designed to improve layper-
son naloxone access and 40 states had adopted Good Samari-
tan laws.206These laws make it easier for medical
professionals to prescribe and dispense naloxone; easier for
people who might be in a position to assist in an overdose to
access naloxone; and encourage those individuals to summon
emergency responders without fear of legal repercussions
(i.e., Good Samaritan laws).
Naloxone is contraindicated in patients known to be
hypersensitive to naloxone hydrochloride or to any of the
other ingredients. There is little peer-reviewed evidence on
any naloxone-related allergic reactions.
Patients and Significant Others/Family
Members
Patients who are being treated for opioid use disorder,
and their family members or significant others, should be
given prescriptions for naloxone. Patients and family mem-
bers/significant others should be trained in the use of naloxone
in overdose. The practice of co-prescribing naloxone for home
use in the event of an overdose situation experienced by the
patient or by any others in the household is endorsed by
ASAM in a public policy statement and by SAMHSA in its
toolkit on opioid overdose.204,207
Individuals Trained and Authorized to Use
Naloxone
Until recently, administration of naloxone for the treat-
ment of opioid overdose was only recommended for hospital
personnel and paramedics. State legislation and new formu-
lations (including a naloxone nasal spray approved in 2015)
has made the use of naloxone for the treatment of opioid
overdose accessible to first responders, including emergency
medical technicians, police officers, firefighters, correctional
officers, and individuals who might witness opioid overdose.
The primary issues to be considered in this Practice Guideline
include the safety and efficacy of naloxone for the treatment
of opioid overdose by first responders and bystanders, and the
best form of naloxone to use for this purpose.
Safety and Efficacy of Bystander Administered
Naloxone
Ample evidence is available s upporting the safety and
efficacy of naloxone for the treatment of opioid over-
dose.207–209Naloxone can be safely and effectively used
by paramedics and other first responders as well as bystand-
ers.210–214Further, naloxone can and should be adminis-
tered to pregnant women in cases of overdose to save the
mother’s life.There have been a number of nonrandomized studies
evaluating the effectiveness of community-based overdose
prevention programs that include the distribution of naloxone
to nonmedical personnel. A comprehensive review of these
trials207concluded that bystanders (mostly opioid users) can
and will use naloxone to reverse opioid overdose when
properly trained, and that this training can be done success-
fully through these programs. The authors acknowledge that
the lack of randomized controlled trials of community-based
overdose prevention programs limits conclusions about their
overall effectiveness. SAMHSA supports the use of naloxone
for the treatment of opioid overdose by bystanders in their
Opioid Overdose Prevention Toolkit.206
Routes of Administration
Naloxone is marketed in vials for injection, in an auto-
injector for either IM or subcutaneous (SC) use, and as a nasal
spray. The FDA-approved autoinjector was designed to be
used by a patient or family member for the treatment of opioid
overdose. In November 2015 the U.S. FDA-approved the
intranasal formulation.
Few studies have compared the efficacy of naloxone by
route of administration, including intranasal, IM, or intrave-
nous. Before FDA approval of the naloxone nasal spray
product, many first responders used improvised adaptors to
convert the liquid naloxone product into a rapidly acting nasal
spray. A recent study comparing the FDA approved nasal
spray and autoinjector to the improvised nasal devices found
that the approved formulations were superior to the impro-
vised devices delivering higher levels of naloxone into the
blood stream.211Further research is needed to definitively
assess the relative effectiveness of injectable vs. intranasal
naloxone.
Summary of Recommendations – Naloxone for
the Treatment of Opioid Overdose
1.
 Naloxone should be administered in
the event of a suspected opioid overdose.
2.
 Naloxone may be administered to
pregnant women in cases of overdose to save the
mother’s life.
3.
 Patients who are being treated for
opioid use disorder (as well as people with a history of
opioid use disorder leaving incarceration) and their family
members/significant others should be given naloxone kits
or prescriptions for naloxone. Patients and family mem-
bers/significant others should be trained in the use of
naloxone in overdose.
4. The Guideline Committee, based on consensus opinion,
recommends that first responders such as emergency
medical services personnel, police officers, and fire-
fighters be trained in and authorized to carry and
administer naloxone.
Areas for Further Research
1. Further research is needed to develop new opioid overdose
reversal medications with higher potency and/or a longer
half-life to address highly potent synthetic opioids such
as fentanyl./C15Adopted by the ASAM Board of Directors December 18, 2019 NPG for the Treatment of Opioid Use Disorder
/C2232020 American Society of Addiction Medicine 63
Copyright © 2020 American Society of Addiction Medicine. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.2. Further research is needed on the most effective strategies
for increasing community availability of naloxone and
community access to training on naloxone administration
and overdose prevention.
3. Further research is needed on the most effective strategies
for engaging patients in treatment following an opioid
overdose reversal with naloxone.
PART 14: AREAS FOR FURTHER RESEARCH
Although this Practice Guideline is intended to guide
the assessment, treatment, and use of medications in opioid
use disorder, there are areas where there was insufficient
evidence to make a recommendation. Further research is
needed to compare the advantages of different medications
for different patient groups, especially with the emergence of
new treatments. The recommended areas of future research
are outlined below and presented in the order they were
introduced in the guideline.
Assessment and Diagnosis of Opioid Use
Disorder (Part 1)
1. More research is needed on best practices for drug testing
during the initial evaluation and throughout the entire
treatment process.
2. Further research is needed on evidence-based approaches for
treating opioid use disorder in patients who continue to use
alcohol, cannabis, and/or other psychoactive substances.
3. Assessment and diagnosis of OUD is occurring increas-
ingly in nontraditional settings, including hospital emer-
gency departments and primary care. Implementation
research is needed to determine the most effective tools
and models for assessment and diagnosis in these settings.
Treatment Options (Part 2)
1. Further research is needed to compare the advantages of
agonists and antagonists in the treatment of opioid use
disorder. Whereas methadone, buprenorphine, and
extended-release injectable naltrexone are all superior to
no treatment in opioid use disorder, less is known about
their relative advantages.
2. Further research is needed to compare extended-release for-
mulations in treatment of opio id use disorder (extended-
release naltrexone vs extended-release buprenorphine).
3. Further research is needed on the comparative effective-
ness of various health care settings and delivery systems
(e.g., integrated delivery systems, health maintenance
organizations, preferred provider organizations, point of
service care etc.) for treatment of opioid use disorder.
4. Across a variety of sub-populations, further research is
needed to better understand and characterize the effective-
ness of and adherence to the different pharmacotherapy
options to treat opioid use disorder.
Opioid Withdrawal Management (Part 3)
1. Further study is needed on methods to accelerate the
withdrawal process and facilitate the introduction of
antagonists. Recently, researchers have begun to investi-
gate the use of combinations of buprenorphine and low
doses of oral naltrexone to rapidly detoxify patients andfacilitate the accelerated introduction of extended-release
injectable naltrexone.215Although these techniques seem
promising, more research is needed before these can be
accepted as standard practice. Similarly, there are insuffi-
cient data to determine whether opioid antagonists (nal-
trexone, naloxone or both) in combination with alpha-2
adrenergic agonists (lofexidine and clonidine) reduce
withdrawal duration or increase rates of retention in
ongoing treatment with naltrexone.84
2. Further research is needed to make recommendations on
the optimal duration of a buprenorphine taper, and to
compare the effectiveness of short versus long tapers with
buprenorphine withdrawal management.
3. Further research is needed to evaluate the safety of inpa-
tient as compared to outpatient withdrawal management.
4. Further research is needed to address whether the protocol
for buprenorphine initiation should be modified for patients
regularly using fentanyl and other high potency opioids
Methadone (Part 4)
1. Further research is needed to assess the effectiveness of
specific types of psychosocial treatment in combination
with methadone in OTP or inpatient settings. Treatment
with methadone generally includes some psychosocial
components, however, it is unclear when added psychoso-
cial treatment improves patient outcomes, and which
psychosocial treatments are beneficial to which patients.
2. Research is needed to evaluate the use of ECG in treatment
with methadone in preventing adverse cardiac events.
3. Further research is needed on how to determine the optimal
length of treatment with methadone for individual patients.
4. More research is needed on outcomes following transitions
from methadone to other opioid use disorder treatment
medications. For example, to what extent do different
protocols for medication transitions affect short- and
long-term treatment outcomes.
Buprenorphine (Part 5)
1. Further research is needed on the comparative effective-
ness of newly approved buprenorphine formulations.
2. Further research is needed on how to determine the opti-
mal length of treatment with buprenorphine for
individual patients.
3. More research is needed to identify best practices for
linking patients to continuing care when buprenorphine
is initiated in an acute care setting.
4. Further research is needed to assess the effectiveness of
specific types of psychosocial treatment in combination
with buprenorphine. Evidence is needed to determine
when added psychosocial treatment improves patient out-
comes, and which psychosocial treatments are beneficial
to which patients.
Naltrexone (Part 6)
1. Further research is needed to test the relative effectiveness
of extended-release injectable naltrexone as compared to
agonist treatment, including methadone and extended-
release injectable buprenorphine, in terms of treatment
retention, substance use outcomes, and mortality.White et el. /C15Adopted by the ASAM Board of Directors December 18, 2019
64 /C2232020 American Society of Addiction Medicine
Copyright © 2020 American Society of Addiction Medicine. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.2. Further research is needed on optimal withdrawal man-
agement and initiation protocols to initiate treatment with
naltrexone and minimize the risk of precipitated with-
drawal.
3. Further research is needed on outcomes related to admin-
istering extended-release injectable naltrexone every
3 weeks for individuals who metabolize naltrexone at
higher rates.
4. Further research is needed on how to determine the opti-
mal length of treatment with naltrexone for individual
patients.
5. Further research is needed on the safety and efficacy of
naltrexone for pregnant women.
6. Further research is needed to develop more effective
strategies for improving adherence to extended-release
injectable naltrexone.
Psychosocial Treatment in Conjunction With
Medications for the Treatment of Opioid Use
Disorder (Part 7)
1. Further research is needed to identify the comparative
advantages of specific psychosocial treatments.
2. Further study is needed to evaluate the effectiveness of
psychosocial treatment in combination with specific phar-
macotherapies.
3. Further research is needed on which concurrent psycho-
social treatments are most effective for different patient
populations and treatment settings including primary care.
4. Further research is needed on which psychosocial treat-
ments can be effectively delivered in primary care settings.
5. Further research is needed on effective strategies for
engaging patients in treatment, including models incorpo-
rating peer support.
Special Populations: Pregnant Women (Part 8)
1. Further research is needed on the safety of combination
buprenorphine/naloxone and new extended-release formu-
lations for use in pregnancy.
2. Further research is needed to investigate the safety of
naltrexone while pregnant or breastfeeding.
3. Further research is needed to determine what, if any, clinical
benefit there is to routinely drug testing pregnant women.
4. Further research is needed on the comparative effective-
ness of inpatient versus outpatient settings for methadone
and buprenorphine initiation for pregnant women.
5. Further research is needed on best treatment approaches
for pregnant or breastfeeding women who cannot or will
not take medication for opioid use disorder.
Special Population: Individuals With Pain
(Part 9)
1. Research on optimal acute and chronic pain management
strategies for patients on medications for opioid use
disorder.
2. Studies on the safety and effectiveness of adding full
agonist opioid analgesics to the patient’s baseline bupre-
norphine dose in non-acute care settings are needed.
3. Further research is needed on chronic pain management
for patients with opioid use disorder.4. Research on pain management in pregnant women on
medications for opioid use disorder during delivery.
Special Populations: Adolescents (Part 10)
1. Further studies are needed to examine the efficacy of
pharmacotherapy for adolescents with opioid use disorder.
Due to the few clinical trials in adolescents, most of
the current recommendations are based on research
with adults.
2. Further research is needed to identify which psycho-
social treatments, alone and in combination with
pharmacotherapy, are best suited for use with adoles-
cents.
3. More longitudinal studies are needed to determine treat-
ment factors (e.g., treatment modality, length of treatment,
treatment settings) associated with positive long-term out-
comes for adolescents with OUD.
Special Populations: Individuals With
Co-Occurring Psychiatric Disorders (Part 11)
1. Implementation research is needed to determine best
practices for assessing, diagnosing, and treating co-occur-
ring psychiatric disorders for patients with opioid use
disorder in diverse treatment settings.
2. More longitudinal research is needed to better understand
how co-occurring psychiatric disorders affect long-term
prognosis for opioid use disorder remission, and how risks
for both opioid use disorder and psychiatric condition
relapse can be anticipated and mitigated.
3. More research is needed on how to improve access and
linkage to psychiatric care for patients with co-occurring
opioid use disorder.
Special Populations: Individuals in the Criminal
Justice System (Part 12)
1. Further research is needed to identify organizational and
patient-level factors influencing real-world effectiveness
of pharmacotherapy delivered in jails and prisons.
2. Research is needed to assess the impact of extended-
release naltrexone with or without psychosocial treatment
on mortality in justice involved individuals.
3. Comparative effectiveness research is needed comparing
extended-release naltrexone with methadone and buprenor-
phine (including extended-release buprenorphine) for
the treatment of opioid use disorder in justice involved
populations, particularly the comparative impact on mor-
tality.
4. More research is needed on best practices for coordinating
and ensuring ongoing access to opioid use disorder treat-
ment upon reentry.
Naloxone for the Treatment of Opioid
Overdose (Part 13)
1. Further research is needed to develop new opioid overdose
reversal medications with higher potency and/or a longer
half-life to address highly potent synthetic opioids such
as fentanyl.
2. Further research is needed on the most effective strategies
for increasing community availability of naloxone and/C15Adopted by the ASAM Board of Directors December 18, 2019 NPG for the Treatment of Opioid Use Disorder
/C2232020 American Society of Addiction Medicine 65
Copyright © 2020 American Society of Addiction Medicine. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.community access to training on naloxone administration
and overdose prevention.
3. Further research is needed on the most effective strategies
for engaging patients in treatment following an opioid
overdose reversal with naloxone.
REFERENCES
1. Hagan J, Shaw J, Duncan P. Bright Futures: Guidelines for Health
Supervision of Infants, Children, and Adolescents. Pocket Guide (3rd
Ed.). Elk Grove Village, IL: American Academy of Pediatrics; 2008.
2. Mee-Lee D, Shulman GD, Fishman MJ. The ASAM Criteria: Treatment
Criteria for Addictive, Substance-Related, and Co-Occuring Conditions
(3rd Ed.) . The Change Companies; 2013.
3. METHADOSE (methadone hydrochloride oral concentrate USP) [Pack-
age Insert]. 2016. https://www.accessdata.fda.gov/drugsatfda_docs/
label/2016/017116s029lbl.pdf.
4. Sigmon SC, Bisaga A, Nunes EV , O’Connor PG, Kosten T, Woody G.
Opioid detoxification and naltrexone induction strategies: recommen-
dations for clinical practice. Am J Drug Alcohol Abuse .
2012;38(3):187–199. doi:10.3109/00952990.2011.653426.
5. American Psychiatric Association. Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of
Mental Disorders: DSM-5. Washington, D.C: American Psychiatric;
2013, doi:10.1016/j.drugalcdep.2009.05.021.
6. American Psychiatric Association. Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of
Mental Disorders: DSM-IV . Washington, D.C: American Psychiatric
Association; 1994.
7. Kampman K, Jarvis M. American Society of Addiction Medicine
(ASAM) National Practice Guideline for the Use of Medications in
the Treatment of Addiction Involving Opioid Use. J Addict Med .
2015;9(5):358–367. doi:10.1097/ADM.0000000000000166.
8. Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration
(SAMHSA). Key Substance Use and Mental Health Indicators in the
United States: Results from the 2018 National Survey on Drug Use and
Health. Rockville, MD: Center for Behavioral Health Statistics and
Quality; 2019, https://www.samhsa.gov/data/.
9. Degenhardt L, Randall D, Hall W, Law M, Butler T, Burns L. Mortality
among clients of a state-wide opioid pharmacotherapy program over 20
years: risk factors and lives saved. Drug Alcohol Depend . 2009;105(1–
2):9–15. doi:10.1016/j.drugalcdep.2009.05.021.
10. Schranz AJ, Fleischauer A, Chu VH , Wu LT, Rosen DL. Trends in drug use-
associated infective endocarditis and heart valve surgery, 2007 to 2017: A study
of statewide discharge data. A n nI n t e r nM e d . 2018. doi:10.7326/M18-2124.
11. Compton WM, Dawson DA, Goldstein RB, Grant BF. Crosswalk
between DSM-IV dependence and DSM-5 substance use disorders
for opioids, cannabis, cocaine and alcohol. Drug Alcohol Depend .
2013;132(1–2):387–390. doi:10.1016/j.drugalcdep.2013.02.036.
12. Fitch KBS, Bernstein SJ, Aguilar MD. The Rand/UCLA Appropriate-
ness Method User’s Manual. https://www.rand.org/pubs/monograph_-
reports/MR1269.html. Published 2001.
13. Food and Drug Administration (FDA). Drug Safety Communications:
FDA urges caution about withholding opioid addiction medications
from patients taking benzodiazepines or CNS depressants: careful
medication management can reduce risks. https://www.fda.gov/
media/107888/download. Published 2017.
14. Jarvis M, Williams J, Hurford M, et al. Appropriate use of drug testing in
clinical addiction medicine. J Addict Med . 2017;11(3):163–173.
doi:10.1097/ADM.0000000000000323.
15. Mattick RP, Kimber J, Breen C, Davoli M. Buprenorphine maintenance
versus placebo or methadone maintenance for opioid dependence. 2003.
doi:10.1002/14651858.CD002207.pub2.
16. American Society of Addiction. ASAM’s Sample Diversion Control
Policy for additional strategies to reduce the risk for diversion. https://
www.asam.org/docs/default-source/advocacy/sample-diversion-policy.
pdf?sfvrsn=9d4675c2_6
17. Muhuri PK, Gfroerer JC, Davies MC. Associations of nonmedical pain
reliever use and initiation of heroin use in the US. In: Rockville, MD:
Center for Behavioral Health Statistics and Quality Data Review; 2013.18. National Institute on Drug Abuse. Overdose death rates. https://www.dru-
gabuse.gov/related-topics/trends-statistics/overdose-death-rates
19. Centers for Disease Control. Injury prevention and control: Data and
statistics.(WISQARS).
20. Dowell D, Haegerich TM, Chou R. CDC guideline for prescribing
opioids for chronic pain–United States. JAMA . 2016;315(15):1624–
1645. doi:10.1001/jama.2016.1464.
21. Florence CS, Zhou C, Luo F, Xu L. The economic burden of prescription
opioid overdose, abuse, and dependence in the United States, 2013. Med
Care . 2016;54(10):901–906. doi:10.1097/MLR.0000000000000625.
22. Council of Economic Advisers. The Underestimated Cost of the Opioid
Crisis. Executive Office of the President ; 2017. whitehouse.gov/cea.
23. Council of Economic Advisers. The Full Cost of the Opioid Crisis: $2.5
Trillion Over Four Years. whitehouse.gov. https://www.whitehouse.gov/
articles/full-cost-opioid-crisis-2-5-trillion-four-years/. Published 10-28-
20219.
24. Van’t Veer A, Carlezon WA Jr. Role of kappa-opioid receptors in stress
and anxiety-related behavior. Psychopharmacol Berl .
2013;229(3):435–452. doi:10.1007/s00213-013-3195-5.
25. Mysels D, Sullivan MA. The kappa-opiate receptor impacts the patho-
physiology and behavior of substance use. Am J Addict .
2009;18(4):272–276. doi:10.1080/10550490902925862.
26. Drummond D, Perryman K. Psychosocial Interventions in Pharmaco-
Therapy of Opioid Dependence: A Literature Review. London: St
George’s University of London: Division of Mental Health, Section
of Addictive Behaviour; 2007.
27. Amato L, Minozzi S, Davoli M, Vecchi S. Psychosocial and pharmaco-
logical treatments versus pharmacological treatments for opioid detoxi-
fication. Cochrane Database Syst Rev . 2011;(9):CD005031. doi:10.1002/
14651858.CD005031.pub4.
28. Amato L, Minozzi S, Davoli M, Vecchi S. Psychosocial combined with
agonist maintenance treatments versus agonist maintenance treatments
alone for treatment of opioid dependence. Cochrane Database Syst Rev .
2011;(10):CD004147. doi:10.1002/14651858.CD004147.pub4.
29. American Society on Addiction Medicine. The ASAM standards of care
for the addiction specialist physician. http://www.asam.org/docs/
default-source/practice-support/quality-improvement/asam-standards-
of-care.pdf?sfvrsn=10. Published 2014.
30. American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists. Pregnant Women
and Prescription Drug Abuse, Dependence and Addiction. Toolkit on
State Legislation ; 2014.
31. Evoy KE, Morrison MD, Saklad SR. Abuse and misuse of pregabalin
and gabapentin. Drugs . 2017;77(4):403–426. doi:10.1007/s40265-017-
0700-x.
32. Lions C, Carrieri MP, Michel L, et al. Predictors of non-prescribed
opioid use after one year of methadone treatment: an attributable-risk
approach (ANRS-Methaville trial). Drug Alcohol Depend . 2014;135:1–
8. doi:10.1016/j.drugalcdep.2013.10.018.
33. Ghitza UE, Epstein DH, Preston KL. Nonreporting of cannabis use:
Predictors and relationship to treatment outcome in methadone main-
tained patients. Addict Behav . 2007;32(5):938–949. doi:10.1016/j.add-
beh.2006.06.034.
34. Preston KL, Silverman K, Higgens ST, et al. Cocaine use early in
treatment predicts outcome in a behavioral treatment program. J Consult
Clin Psychol . 1998;66(4):691–696. doi:10.1037/0022-006x.66.4.691.
35. Johnson RE, Eissenberg T, Stitzer ML, Strain EC, Liebson IA, Bigelow
GE. A placebo controlled clinical trial of buprenorphine as a treatment
for opioid dependence. Drug Alcohol Depend . 1995;40(1):17–25.
doi:10.1016/0376-8716(95)01186-2.
36. Mattick RP, Breen C, Kimber J, Davoli M, Breen R, Mattick RP.
Methadone maintenance therapy versus no opioid replacement therapy
for opioid dependence. 2003. doi:10.1002/14651858.cd002209.
37. Prochaska JJ, Delucchi K, Hall SM. A meta-analysis of smoking
cessation interventions with individuals in substance abuse treatment
or recovery. J Consult Clin Psychol . 2004;72(6):1144–1156.
doi:10.1037/0022-006X.72.6.1144.
38. Baca R, Bryan D. Mexican Women, Migration and Sex Roles. Migr
Today . 1985;13:14–18.White et el. /C15Adopted by the ASAM Board of Directors December 18, 2019
66 /C2232020 American Society of Addiction Medicine
Copyright © 2020 American Society of Addiction Medicine. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.39. Tsoh JY, Chi FW, Mertens JR, Weisner CM. Stopping smoking during
first year of substance use treatment predicted 9-year alcohol and drug
treatment outcomes. Drug Alcohol Depend . 2011;114(2–3):110–118.
doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.drugalcdep.2010.09.008.
40. Handelsman L, Cochrane KJ, Aronson MJ, Ness R, Rubinstein KJ, Kanof
PD. Two new rating scales for opiate withdrawal. Am J Drug Alcohol
Abuse . 1987;13(3):293–308. doi:10.3109/00952998709001515.
41. Peachey JE, Lei H. Assessment of op ioid dependence with naloxone. Addic-
tion. 1988;83(2):193–201. doi:10.1111/j.1360-0443.1988.tb03981.x.
42. Substance Abuse and Mental Health Ser vices Administration. Federal guide-
lines for opioid treatment. http://www.dpt .samhsa.gov/pdf/FederalGuidelines-
forOpioidTreatment5-6-2013revisiondraft_508.pdf. Published 2013.
43. Kakko J, Svanborg KD, Kreek MJ, Heilig M. 1-year retention and social
function after buprenorphine-assisted relapse prevention treatment for
heroin dependence in Sweden: a randomised, placebo-controlled
trial. The Lancet . 2003;361(9358):662–668. doi:10.1016/s0140-
6736(03)12600-1.
44. Vanichseni S, Wongsuwan B, Choopanya K, Wongpanich K. A Con-
trolled Trial of Methadone Maintenance in a Population of Intravenous
Drug Users in Bangkok: Implications for Prevention of HIV . Int J
Addict . 2009;26(12):1313–1320. doi:10.3109/10826089109062163.
45. Newman MG, Szkodny LE, Llera SJ, Przeworski A. A review of
technology-assisted self-help and minimal contact therapies for drug
and alcohol abuse and smoking addiction: Is human contact necessary
for therapeutic efficacy? Clin Psychol Rev . 2011;31(1):178–186. doi:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.cpr.2010.10.002.
46. Woody GE, Bruce D, Korthuis PT, et al. HIV risk reduction with
buprenorphine-naloxone or methadone: findings from a randomized
trial. J Acquir Immune Defic Syndr . 2014;66(3):288–293. doi:10.1097/
QAI.0000000000000165.
47. Ling W, Charuvastra C, Collins JF, et al. Buprenorphine maintenance
treatment of opiate dependence: a multicenter, randomized clinical trial.
Addiction . 1998;93(4):475–486. doi:10.1046/j.1360-0443.1998.9344753.x.
48. Comer SD, Sullivan MA, Yu E, et al. Injectable, sustained-release
naltrexone for the treatment of opioid dependence: a randomized,
placebo-controlled trial. Arch Gen Psychiatry . 2006;63(2):210–218.
doi:10.1001/archpsyc.63.2.210.
49. Krupitsky E, Nunes EV , Ling W, Illeperuma A, Gastfriend DR, Silverman
BL. Injectable extended-release naltrexone for opioid dependence: a
double-blind, placebo-controlled, multicentre randomised trial. The Lan-
cet. 2011;377(9776):1506–1513. doi:10.1016/s0140-6736(11)60358-9.
50. Syed YY , Keating GM. Extended-release intramuscular naltrexone (VIV-
ITROL(R)): a review of its use in the prevention of relapse to opioid
dependence in detoxified patients. CNS Drugs . 2013;27(10):851–861.
doi:10.1007/s40263-013-0110-x.
51. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) C for DE and R. Application
number: 209229Orig1s000. Labeling. https://www.accessdata.fda.gov/
drugsatfda_docs/nda/2018/209229Orig1s000lbl.pdf. Published 2018.
52. Nielsen S, Larance B, Degenhardt L, Gowing L, Kehler C, Lintzeris N.
Opioid agonist treatment for pharmaceutical opioid dependent people.
Cochrane Database Syst Rev . 2016;(5):CD011117. doi:10.1002/
14651858.CD011117.pub2.
53. Canadian Agency for Drugs and Technologies in Health. Buprenor-
phine/naloxone versus methadone for the treatment of opioid depen-
dence: A review of comparative clinical effectiveness, cost-
effectiveness and guidelines. http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/
NBK385163/. Published 2016.
54. Soyka M, Apelt SM, Lieb M, Wittch en HU. One-year mortality rates of
patients receiving methadone and bupr enorphine maintenance therapy: a
nationally representative cohort study in 2694 patients. J Clin Psychophar-
macol . 2006;26(6):657–660. doi:10.1097/01.jcp.0000245561.99036.49.
55. Center for Disease Control. Advises against misapplication of the
guideline for prescribing opioids for chronic pain. https://
www.cdc.gov/media/releases/2019/s0424-advises-misapplication-
guideline-prescribing-opioids.html. Published 2019.
56. American Society of Addiction. Morphine Equivalent Units/Morphine Milli-
gram Equivalents. https://www.asam.or g/docs/default-source/public-policy-statements/2016-statement-on-morphine-equivalent-units-morphine-milli-
gram-equivalents.pdf?sfvrsn=3bc177c2_6. Published October 6, 2016.
57. Harrison Narcotic Act of 1914 PubLNo 63-223 38 Stat. 785, repealed by
Comprehensive Drug Abuse Prevention and Control Act of 1970,
Pub. L. No. 91-513, 84 Stat. 1236.(codified as amended at 21 U.S.C.
§§ 801–971).
58. Drug Enforcement Agency, Diversion Control Division. Emergency
Narcotic Addiction Treatment. United States Department of Justice.
https://www.deadiversion.usdoj.gov/pubs/advisories/emerg_treat.htm.
59. Nelson PK, Mathers BM, Cowie B, et al. Global epidemiology of
hepatitis B and hepatitis C in people who inject drugs: results of
systematic reviews. The Lancet . 2011;378(9791):571–583.
doi:10.1016/s0140-6736(11)61097-0.
60. Lee JD, Nunes EV, Novo P, Bachrach K, Bailey GL, Bhatt S. Compara-
tive effectiveness of extended-release naltrexone versus buprenorphine–
naloxone for opioid relapse prevention (X:BOT): A multicentre, open-
label, randomised controlled trial. Lance . 2017;391:309–318.
61. Tanum L, Solli KK, Latif ZE, et al. Effectiveness of injectable extended-
release naltrexone vs daily buprenorphine-naloxone for opioid depen-
dence: A randomized clinical noninferiority trial. JAMA Psychiatry .
2017;74(12):1197–1205. doi:10.1001/jamapsychiatry.2017.3206.
62. Larochelle MR, Bernson D, Land T, et al. Medication for opioid use
disorder after nonfatal opioid overdose and association with mortality: A
cohort study. Ann Intern Med . 2018;169(3):137–145. doi:10.7326/M17-
3107.
63. SUBOXONE [package insert] RV A: Reckitt Benckiser Pharmaceuticals
Inc: April 2014.
64. VIVITROL [package insert] W MA: Alkermes, Inc PY-; Revised July
2013.
65. FDA Suboxone. Highlights of prescribing information. https://www.
accessdata.fda.gov/drugsatfda_docs/label/2018/
022410s033,020732s019,020733s023lbl.pdf.
66. ZUBSOLV [package insert] M NJ, Orexo US, Inc: December 2014.
67. Sigmon SC, Dunn KE, Saulsgiver K, et al. A randomized, double-blind
evaluation of buprenorphine taper duration in primary prescription
opioid abusers. JAMA Psychiatry . 2013;70(12):1347–1354. doi:10.
1001/jamapsychiatry.2013.2216.
68. Saxon AJ, Ling W, Hillhouse M, et al. Buprenorphine/Naloxone and
methadone effects on laboratory indices of liver health: a randomized
trial. Drug Alcohol Depend . 2013;128(1–2):71–76. doi:10.1016/j.dru-
galcdep.2012.08.002.
69. BUNAV AIL [package insert]. Raleigh NBSI Inc; June 2014.
70. Food and Drug Administration (FDA). Drug Safety Communications:
FDAwarns about serious risks and death when combining opioid pain or
cough medicines with benzodiazepines; requires its strongest warning.
https://www.fda.gov/downloads/Drugs/DrugSafety/UCM518672.pdf.
Published 2016.
71. Food and Drug Administration (FDA). Drug Safety Communications:
FDA warns about several safety issues with opioid pain medicines;
requires label changes. 2016. https://www.fda.gov/downloads/Drugs/
DrugSafety/UCM491302.pdf
72. Minozzi S, Amato L, Vecchi S. Oral naltrexone maintenance treatment
for opioid dependence. Cochrane Database Sys Rev . 2011;CD001333.
73. National Institutes of Health, Buprenorphine S. What should I know about
storage and disposal of this medication? http://www.nlm.nih.gov/medli-
neplus/druginfo/meds/a605002.html-storage-conditions. Published 2012.
74. Jarvis BP, Holtyn AF, Subramaniam S, et al. Extended-release injectable
naltrexone for opioid use disorder: a systematic review. Addiction .
2018;113(7):1188–1209. doi:10.1111/add.14180.
75. National Institute on Drug Abuse. Principles of Drug Addiction Treatment:
A Research-Based Guide 3rd Edition. Bethesda, MD: National Institute on
Drug Abuse; National Institutes of H ealth; U.S. Department of Health and
Human Services; 2018. https://www.drugabuse.gov/node/pdf/675/princi-
ples-of-drug-addiction-treatment-a-re search-based-guide-third-edition
76. Darke S, Larney S, Farrell M. Yes, people can die from opiate withdrawal:
Editorial. Addiction . 2017;112(2):199–200. doi:10.1111/add.13512./C15Adopted by the ASAM Board of Directors December 18, 2019 NPG for the Treatment of Opioid Use Disorder
/C2232020 American Society of Addiction Medicine 67
Copyright © 2020 American Society of Addiction Medicine. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.77. Hassanian-Moghaddam H, Afzali S, Pooya A. Withdrawal syndrome
caused by naltrexone in opioid abusers. Hum Exp Toxicol .
2014;33(6):561–567. doi:10.1177/0960327112450901.
78. Ruan MDX, Chen MDPT, Gudin MDJ, Couch MDJP, Chiravuri MDS,
Case study. Acute opioid withdrawal precipitated by ingestion of
crushed Embeda (morphine extended release with sequestered naltrex-
one): Case report and the focused review of the literature. J Opioid
Manag . 2010;6(4):300–303. doi:10.5055/jom.2010.0028.
79. Fishman M. Precipitated withdrawal during maintenance opioid block-
ade with extended release naltrexone. Addiction . 2008;103(8):1399–
1401. doi:10.1111/j.1360-0443.2008.02252.x.
80. Kharasch ED. Opioid Half-lives and Hemlines: The Long and Short of
Fashion. Anesthesiology . 2015;122(5):969–970. doi:10.1097/ALN.000
0000000000634.
81. Wesson DR, Ling W. The Clinical Opiate Withdrawal Scale (COWS). J
Psychoact Drugs . 2003;35(2):253–259. doi:10.1080/02791072.2003.
10400007.
82. Day E, Strang J. Outpatient versus inpatient opioid detoxification: a
randomized controlled trial. J Subst Abuse Treat . 2011;40(1):56–66.
doi:10.1016/j.jsat.2010.08.007.
83. Gowing L, Farrell M, Ali R, White JM. Alpha(2)-adrenergic agonists for
the management of opioid withdrawal. Cochrane Database Syst Rev .
2016;2016(5):CD002024. doi:10.1002/14651858.CD002024.pub5.
84. Gowing L, Ali R, White JM, Mbewe D. Buprenorphine for managing
opioid withdrawal. Cochrane Database Syst Rev . 2017;2(2):CD002025.
doi:10.1002/14651858.CD002025.pub5.
85. Collins ED, Kleber HD, Whittington RA, Heitler NE. Anesthesia-
assisted vs buprenorphine- or clonidine-assisted heroin detoxification
and naltrexone induction: a randomized trial. JAMA . 2005;294(8):903–
913. doi:10.1001/jama.294.8.903.
86. Kienbaum P, Scherbaum N, Thu ¨rauf N, Michel MC, Gastpar M, Peters J.
Acute detoxification of opioid-addicted patients with naloxone during
propofol or methohexital anesthesia: A comparison of withdrawal
symptoms, neuroendocrine, metabolic, and cardiovascular patterns. Crit
Care Med . 2000;28(4):969–976. doi:10.1097/00003246-200004000-
00010.
87. Hamilton RJ. Complications of Ultrarapid Opioid Detoxification with
Subcutaneous Naltrexone Pellets. Acad Emerg Med . 2002;9(1):63–68.
doi:10.1197/aemj.9.1.63.
88. Centers for Disease Control. Deaths and severe adverse events associ-
ated with anesthesia-assisted rapid opioid detoxification: New York
City, 2012. Morb Mortal Wkly . 2013;62(38):777–780.
89. Gowing L, Ali R, White JM. Opioid antagonists under heavy sedation or
anaesthesia for opioid withdrawal. Cochrane Database Syst Rev .
2010;(1):CD002022. doi:10.1002/14651858.CD002022.pub3.
90. Martin JA, Campbell A, Killip T, et al. QT interval screening in
methadone maintenance treatment: Report of a SAMHSA expert panel.
J Addict Dis . 2011;30(4):283–306. doi:10.1080/10550887.2011.
610710.
91. Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration
(SAMHSA). Medications for opioid use disorder for healthcare and
addiction professionals, policymakers, patients, and families: Treatment
Improvement Protocol (TIP) 63. HHS Publication No. (SMA) 18-
5063FULLDOC. https://store.samhsa.gov/system/files/sma18-5063full-
doc.pdf. Published 2018.
92. Baxter LE Sr, Campbell A, Deshields M, et al. Safe methadone
induction and stabilization: report of an expert panel. J Addict Med .
2013;7(6):377–386. doi:10.1097/01.ADM.0000435321.39251.d7.
93. Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration. Key
substance use and mental health indicators in the United States: Results
from the 2017 National Survey on Drug Use and Health (HHS Publica-
tion No. SMA 18-5068, NSDUH Series H-53). https://www. samhsa.-
gov/data. Published 2018.
94. Substance Abuse and Mental Health Service Administration TIP (TIP) S
45.Detoxification and Substance Abuse Treatment. Rockville, MD:
Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration; 2006.
95. Eap CB, Bourquin M, Martin J-L, et al. Plasma concentrations of the
enantiomers of methadone and therapeutic response in methadonemaintenance treatment. Drug Alcohol Depend . 2000;61(1):47–54.
doi:10.1016/s0376-8716(00)00121-6.
96. Eap CB, Buclin T, Baumann P. Interindividual variability of the clinical
pharmacokinetics of methadone: implications for the treatment of
opioid dependence. Clin Pharmacokinet . 2002;41(14):1153–1193.
doi:10.2165/00003088-200241140-00003.
97. Leavitt SB, Shinderman M, Maxwell S, Eap CB, Paris P. When
‘‘enough’’ is not enough: New perspectives on optimal methadone
maintenance dose. Mt Sinai J Med . 2000;67(5–6):404–411.
98. Loimer N, Schmid R. The use of plasma levels to optimize methadone
maintenance treatment. Drug Alcohol Depend . 1992;30(3):241–246.
doi:10.1016/0376-8716(92)90058-k.
99. Strain EC. Dose-Response Effects of Methadone in the Treatment of
Opioid Dependence. Ann Intern Med . 1993;119(1):23. doi:10.7326/
0003-4819-119-1-199307010-00004.
100. Strain EC, Bigelow GE, Liebson IA, Stitzer ML. Moderate- vs high-
dose methadone in the treatment of opioid dependence. JAMA .
1999;281(11):1000. doi:10.1001/jama.281.11.1000.
101. Ehret GB, V oide C, Gex-Fabry M, et al. Drug-induced long QT
syndrome in injection drug users receiving methadone: high frequency
in hospitalized patients and risk factors. Arch Intern Med .
2006;166(12):1280–1287. doi:10.1001/archinte.166.12.1280.
102. US Food and Drug Administration. Information for healthcare profes-
sionals methadone hydrochloride: Text version. http://www.fda.gov/
Drugs/DrugSafety/PostmarketDrugSafetyInformationforPatientsand-
Providers/ucm142841.htm.
103. Cohen SP. Concerns about consensus guidelines for QTc interval
screening in methadone treatment. Ann Intern Med . 2009;151(3):216.
doi:10.7326/0003-4819-151-3-200908040-00014.
104. Pani PP, Trogu E, Maremmani I, Pacini M. QTc interval screening for
cardiac risk in methadone treatment of opioid dependence. Cochrane
Drugs and Alcohol Group, ed. Cochrane Database Syst Rev . 2013.
doi:10.1002/14651858.CD008939.pub2.
105. Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration. Drug
Addiction Treatment Act, full text UR - http://buprenorphine.samhsa.-
gov/fulllaw.html.
106. S.524 - Comprehensive Addiction and Recovery Act of 2016 .(2019).
https://www.congress.gov/bill/114th-congress/senate-bill/524/text
107. H.R.6 - Support for Patients and Communities Act .(2019). https://www.
congress.gov/bill/115th-congress/house-bill/6. Accessed June 4, 2019.
108. Parran TV , Adelman CA, Merkin B, et al. Long-term outcomes of office-
based buprenorphine/naloxone maintenance therapy. Drug Alcohol
Depend . 2010;106(1):56–60. doi:10.1016/j.drugalcdep.2009.07.013.
109. Comprehensive Drug Abuse Prevention and Control Act of 1970. 91-
513, 84.
110. Cunningham CO, Giovanniello A, Li X, Kunins HV , Roose RJ, Sohler
NL. A comparison of buprenorphine induction strategies: patient-cen-
tered home-based inductions versus standard-of-care office-based
inductions. J Subst Abuse Treat . 2011;40(4):349–356. doi:10.1016/
j.jsat.2010.12.002.
111. Institute for Clinical and Economic Review (ICER). Extended-release
opioid agonists and antagonist medications for addiction treatment
(MAT) in patients with opioid use disorder: Effectiveness and value.
https://icer-review.org/material/mat-evidence-report. Published 2018.
112. Gunderson EW, Wang XQ, Fiellin DA, Bryan B, Levin FR. Unobserved
versus observed office buprenorphine/naloxone induction: a pilot ran-
domized clinical trial. Addict Behav . 2010;35(5):537–540. doi:10.1016/
j.addbeh.2010.01.001.
113. Lee JD, Grossman E, DiRocco D, Gourevitch MN. Home buprenor-
phine/naloxone induction in primary care. J Gen Intern Med .
2009;24(2):226–232. doi:10.1007/s11606-008-0866-8.
114. Y okell M, Zaller N, Green T, Rich J. Buprenorphine and Buprenorphine/
Naloxone Diversion, Misuse, and Illicit Use: An International Review. Curr
Drug Abuse Rev . 2011;4(1):28–41. doi:10.2174/1874473711104010028.
115. Mannelli P, Peindl KS, Lee T, Bhatia KS, Wu LT. Buprenorphine-
mediated transition from opioid agonist to antagonist treatment: state of
the art and new perspectives. Curr Drug Abuse Rev . 2012;5(1):52–63.White et el. /C15Adopted by the ASAM Board of Directors December 18, 2019
68 /C2232020 American Society of Addiction Medicine
Copyright © 2020 American Society of Addiction Medicine. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.116. Adi Y , Juarez-Garcia A, Wang D, et al. Oral naltrexone as a treatment for
relapse prevention in formerly opioid-dependent drug users: a system-
atic review and economic evaluation. Health Technol Assess .
2007;11(6). doi:10.3310/hta11060.
117. Bickel WK, Stitzer ML, Bigelow GE, Liebson IA, Jasinski DR, Johnson
RE. A clinical trial of buprenorphine: Comparison with methadone in
the detoxification of heroin addicts. Clin Pharmacol Ther .
1988;43(1):72–78. doi:10.1038/clpt.1988.13.
118. Ma J, Bao YP, Wang RJ, et al. Effects of medication-assisted treatment
on mortality among opioids users: A systematic review and meta-
analysis. Mol Psychiatry . 2018. doi:10.1038/s41380-018-0094-5.
119. Lee JD, Friedmann PD, Kinlock TW, et al. Extended-release naltrexone
to prevent opioid relapse in criminal justice offenders. N Engl J Med .
2016;374(13):1232–1242. doi:10.1056/NEJMoa1505409.
120. Weiss RD, Potter JS, Fiellin DA, et al. Adjunctive counseling during
brief and extended buprenorphine-naloxone treatment for prescription
opioid dependence: a 2-phase randomized controlled trial. Arch Gen
Psychiatry . 2011;68(12):1238–1246. doi:10.1001/archgenpsychia-
try.2011.121.
121. Strang J, McCambridge J, Best D, et al. Loss of tolerance and overdose
mortality after inpatient opiate detoxification: follow up study. BMJ .
2003;326(7396):959–960. doi:10.1136/bmj.326.7396.959.
122. Dugosh K, Abraham A, Seymour B, McLoyd K, Chalk M, Festinger
DA. Systematic review on the use of psychosocial interventions in
conjunction with medications for the treatment of opioid addiction. J
Addict Med . 2016;10(2):93–103.
123. Dutra L, Stathopoulou G, Basden SL, Leyro TM, Powers MB, Otto MW.
A meta-analytic review of psychosocial interventions for substance use
disorders. Am J Psychiatry . 2008;165(2):179–187. doi:10.1176/
appi.ajp.2007.06111851.
124. Katz EC, Brown BS, Schwartz RP, O’Grady KE, King SD, Gandhi D.
Transitioning opioid-dependent patients from detoxification to long-
term treatment: efficacy of intensive role induction. Drug Alcohol
Depend . 2011;117(1):24–30. doi:10.1016/j.drugalcdep.2010.12.024.
125. Brigham GS, Slesnick N, Winhusen TM, Lewis DF, Guo X, Somoza E.
A randomized pilot clinical trial to evaluate the efficacy of Community
Reinforcement and Family Training for Treatment Retention (CRAFT-
T) for improving outcomes for patients completing opioid detoxifica-
tion. Drug Alcohol Depend . 2014;138:240–243. doi:10.1016/j.drugalc-
dep.2014.02.013.
126. Ruetsch C, Tkacz J, McPherson TL, Cacciola J. The effect of telephonic
patient support on treatment for opioid dependence: outcomes at one
year follow-up. Addict Behav . 2012;37(5):686–689. doi:10.1016/j.add-
beh.2012.01.013.
127. Fiellin DA, Barry DT, Sullivan LE, et al. A randomized trial of cognitive
behavioral therapy in primary care-based buprenorphine. Am J Med .
2013;126(1):74. e11–7 doi:10.1016/j.amjmed.2012.07.005.
128. Fiellin DA, Pantalon MV , Chawarski MC, et al. Counseling plus
buprenorphine-naloxone maintenance therapy for opioid dependence.
N Engl J Med . 2006;355(4):365–374. doi:10.1056/NEJMoa055255.
129. Tetrault JM, Moore BA, Barry DT, et al. Brief versus extended counsel-
ing along with buprenorphine/naloxone for HIV-infected opioid depen-
dent patients. J Subst Abuse Treat. 2012;43(4):433-439. doi:10.1016/
j.jsat.2012.07.011
130. Committee on Obstetric P. Committee Opinion No. 711: Opioid use and
opioid use disorder in pregnancy. Obstet Gynecol . 2017;130(2):e81–
e94. doi:10.1097/AOG.0000000000002235.
131. Chasnoff IJ, Landress HJ, Barrett ME. The Prevalence of Illicit-Drug or
Alcohol-Use during Pregnancy and Discrepancies in Mandatory Report-
ing in Pinellas County, Florida. N Engl J Med . 1990;322(17):1202–
1206. doi:10.1056/Nejm199004263221706.
132. Office of Women’s Health. Opioid Use, Misuse, And Overdose in
Women. Department of Health and Human Services; 2017. https://
www.womenshealth.gov/files/documents/final-report-opioid-508.pdf
133. Jones HE, Heil SH, Tuten M, et al. Cigarette smoking in opioid-dependent
pregnant women: neonatal and maternal outcomes. Drug Alcohol Depend .
2013;131(3):271–277. doi:10.1016/j.drugalcdep.2012.11.019.134. Burns L, Mattick RP, Lim K, Wallace C. Methadone in pregnancy:
treatment retention and neonatal outcomes. Addiction . 2007;102(2):
264–270. doi:10.1111/j.1360-0443.2006.01651.x.
135. Noormohammadi A, Forinash A, Yancey A, Crannage E, Campbell K,
Shyken J. Buprenorphine Versus Methadone for Opioid Dependence in
Pregnancy. Ann Pharmacother . 2016;50(8):666–672. doi:10.1177/
1060028016648367.
136. Jones HE, Kaltenbach K, Heil SH, et al. Neonatal abstinence syndrome
after methadone or buprenorphine exposure. N Engl J Med .
2010;363(24):2320–2331. doi:10.1056/NEJMoa1005359.
137. Wiegand SL, Stringer EM, Stuebe AM, Jones H, Seashore C, Thorp J.
Buprenorphine and naloxone compared with methadone treatment in
pregnancy. Obstet Gynecol . 2015;125(2):363–368. doi:10.1097/
AOG.0000000000000640.
138. Debelak K, Morrone WR, O’Grady KE, Jones HE. Buprenorphine þ
naloxone in the treatment of opioid dependence during pregnancy-initial
patient care and outcome data. Am J Addict . 2013;22(3):252–254.
doi:10.1111/j.1521-0391.2012.12005.x.
139. Kreek MJ. Methadone disposition during the perinatal period in humans.
Pharmacol Biochem Behav . 1979;11(Suppl):7–13.
140. Wolff K, Boys A, Rostami-Hodjegan A, Hay A, Raistrick D. Changes to
methadone clearance during pregnancy. Eur J Clin Pharmacol .
2005;61(10):763–768. doi:10.1007/s00228-005-0035-5.
141. Nekhayeva IA, Nanovskaya TN, Deshmukh SV, Zharikova OL, Hankins
GD, Ahmed MS. Bidirectional transfer of methadone across human
placenta. Biochem Pharmacol . 2005;69(1):187–197. doi:10.1016/
j.bcp.2004.09.008.
142. Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration. Treat-
ment Improvement Protocol Series 2: Pregnant, Substance-Using
Women . Rockville, MD: Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services
Administration.
143. Swift RM, Dudley M, DePetrillo P, Camara P, Griffiths W. Altered
methadone pharmacokinetics in pregnancy: Implications for dosing. J
Subst Abuse . 1989;1(4):453–460.
144. Cleary BJ, Donnelly J, Strawbridge J, et al. Methadone dose and neonatal
abstinence syndrome-systematic review and meta-analysis. Addiction .
2010;105(12):2071–2084. doi:10.1111/j.1360-0443.2010.03120.x.
145. McCarthy JJ, Leamon MH, Willits NH, Salo R. The effect of methadone
dose regimen on neonatal abstinence syndrome. J Addict Med .
2015;9(2):105–110. doi:10.1097/ADM.0000000000000099.
146. Wong J, Saver B, Scanlan JM, et al. Does Maternal Buprenorphine Dose
Affect Severity or Incidence of Neonatal Abstinence Syndrome? JA d d i c t
Med. 2018;12(6):435–441. doi:10.1097/ADM.0000000000000427.
147. Academy of Breastfeeding Medicine Protocol C, Jansson LM. ABM
clinical protocol #21: Guidelines for breastfeeding and the drug-depen-
dent woman. Breastfeed Med . 2009;4(4):225–228. doi:10.1089/
bfm.2009.9987.
148. Abdel-Latif ME, Pinner J, Clews S, Cooke F, Lui K, Oei J. Effects of
breast milk on the severity and outcome of neonatal abstinence syn-
drome among infants of drug-dependent mothers. Pediatrics .
2006;117(6):e1163–e1169. doi:10.1542/peds.2005-1561.
149. Ballard JL. Treatment of Neonatal Abstinence Syndrome with Breast
Milk Containing Methadone. J Perinat Neonatal Nurs . 2002;15(4):76–
85. doi:10.1097/00005237-200203000-00008.
150. Liu AJ, Nanan R. Methadone maintenance and breastfeeding in the
neonatal period. Pediatrics . 2008;121(4):869. author reply 869-70.
doi:10.1542/peds.2008-0217.
151. Ilett KF, Hackett LP, Gower S, Doherty DA, Hamilton D, Bartu AE.
Estimated dose exposure of the neonate to buprenorphine and its
metabolite norbuprenorphine via breastmilk during maternal buprenor-
phine substitution treatment. Breastfeed Med . 2012;7:269–274.
doi:10.1089/bfm.2011.0096.
152. Drugs and Lactation Database (LactMed) [Internet]. Naltrexone. Octo-
ber 2018.
153. Hines S, Theodorou S, Williamson A, Fong D, Curry K. Management of
acute pain in methadone maintenance therapy in-patients. Drug Alcohol
Rev. 2008;27(5):519–523. doi:10.1080/09595230802245519./C15Adopted by the ASAM Board of Directors December 18, 2019 NPG for the Treatment of Opioid Use Disorder
/C2232020 American Society of Addiction Medicine 69
Copyright © 2020 American Society of Addiction Medicine. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.154. Rubenstein RB, Spira I, Wolff WI. Management of surgical problems in
patients on methadone maintenance. Am J Surg . 1976;131(5):566–569.
doi:10.1016/0002-9610(76)90013-1.
155. Scimeca MM, Savage SR, Portenoy R, Lowinson J. Treatment of pain in
methadone-maintained patients. Mt Sinai J Med . 2000;67(5–6):412–
422.
156. Vadivelu N, Mitra S, Kaye AD, Urman RD. Perioperative analgesia and
challenges in the drug-addict ed and drug-dependent patient. Best Pr
Res Clin Anaesthesiol . 2014;28(1):91–101. doi:10.1016/j.bpa.2014.
02.003.
157. Kornfeld H, Manfredi L. Effectiveness of full agonist opioids in patients
stabilized on buprenorphine undergoing major surgery: a case series.
Am J Ther. 2010;17(5):523-528. doi:10.1097/MJT.0b013e3181be0804
158. Harrison TK, Kornfeld H, Aggarwal AK, Lembke A. Perioperative
Considerations for the Patient with Opioid Use Disorder on Buprenor-
phine, Methadone, or Naltrexone Maintenance Therapy. Anesthesiol
Clin. 2018;36(3):345-359. doi:10.1016/j.anclin.2018.04.002
159. Minozzi S, Amato L, Bellisario C, Davoli M. Detoxification treatments
for opiate dependent adolescents. Cochrane Database Syst Rev .
2014;4(4):CD006749. doi:10.1002/14651858.CD006749.pub3.
160. Minozzi S, Amato L, Bellisario C, Davoli M. Maintenance treatments
for opiate-dependent adolescents. Cochrane Database Syst Rev .
2014;6(6):CD007210. doi:10.1002/14651858.CD007210.pub3.
161. Ford CA, Millstein SG, Halpern-Felsher BL, Irwin CE Jr. Influence of
physician confidentiality assurances on adolescents’ willingness to dis-
close information and seek future health care. A randomized controlled
trial. JAMA . 1997;278(12):1029–1034. doi:10.1001/jama.1997.035
50120089044.
162. Hallfors DD, Waller MW, Ford CA, Halpern CT, Brodish PH, Iritani B.
Adolescent depression and suicide risk: association with sex and drug
behavior. Am J Prev Med . 2004;27(3):224–231. doi:10.1016/
j.amepre.2004.06.001.
163. Weddle M, Kokotailo PK. Confidentiality and consent in adolescent
substance abuse: an update. Virtual Mentor . 2005;7(3). virtualmen-
tor.2005.7.3.pfor1-0503. doi:10.1001/virtualmentor.2005.7.3.pfor1-0503.
164. Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration. Treat-
ment Improvement Protocol Series 33: Treatment for Stimulant Use
Disorders. Rockville, MD: Substance Abuse and Mental Health Ser-
vices Administration; 1999.
165. Hopfer CJ, Khuri E, Crowley TJ, Hooks S. Adolescent heroin use: a
review of the descriptive and treatment literature. J Subst Abuse Treat .
2002;23(3):231–237. doi:10.1016/s0740-5472(02)00250-7.
166. Marsch LA, Bickel WK, Badger GJ, et al. Comparison of pharmaco-
logical treatments for opioid-dependent adolescents: a randomized
controlled trial. Arch Gen Psychiatry . 2005;62(10):1157–1164.
doi:10.1001/archpsyc.62.10.1157.
167. Woody GE, Poole SA, Subramaniam G, et al. Extended vs short-term
buprenorphine-naloxone for treatment of opioid-addicted youth: a
randomized trial. JAMA. 2008;300(17):2003-2011. doi:10.1001/
jama.2008.574
168. Fishman MJ, Winstanley EL, Curran E, Garrett S, Subramaniam G.
Treatment of opioid dependence in adolescents and young adults with
extended release naltrexone: prelim inary case-series and feasibility. Addic-
tion. 2010;105(9):1669–1676. doi:10.1111/j.1360-0443.2010.03015.x.
169. Brooner RK. Psychiatric and substance use comorbidity among treat-
ment-seeking opioid abusers. Arch Gen Psychiatry . 1997;54(1):71.
doi:10.1001/archpsyc.1997.01830130077015.
170. Chambers RA, Bickel WK, Potenza MN. A scale-free systems theory of
motivation and addiction. Neurosci Biobehav Rev . 2007;31(7):1017–
1045. doi:10.1016/j.neubiorev.2007.04.005.
171. Krystal JH, D’Souza DC, Gallinat Ju ¨, et al. The vulnerability to alcohol
and substance abuse in individuals diagnosed with schizophrenia.
Neurotox Res . 2006;10(3–4):235–252. doi:10.1007/bf03033360.
172. Bradizza CM, Stasiewicz PR, Paas ND. Relapse to alcohol and drug use
among individuals diagnosed with co-occurring mental health and sub-
stance use disorders: a review. Clin Psychol Rev . 2006;26(2):162–178.
doi:10.1016/j.cpr.2005.11.005.173. Khantzian EJ. The self-medication hypothesis of addictive disorders:
focus on heroin and cocaine dependence. Am J Psychiatry .
1985;142(11):1259–1264. doi:10.1176/ajp.142.11.1259.
174. Lybrand J, Caroff S. Management of schizophrenia with substance use
disorders. Psychiatr Clin North Am . 2009;32(4):821–833. doi:10.1016/
j.psc.2009.09.002.
175. Poorolajal J, Haghtalab T, Farhadi M, Darvishi N. Substance use
disorder and risk of suicidal ideation, suicide attempt and suicide death:
a meta-analysis. J Public Health Oxf Engl . 2016;38(3):e282–e291.
doi:10.1093/pubmed/fdv148.
176. Gvion Y , Apter A. Suicide and suicidal behavior. Public Health Rev .
2012;34(2). doi:10.1007/bf03391677.
177. Bertolote JM, Fleischmann A, De Leo D, Wasserman D. Psychiatric
diagnoses and suicide: revisiting the evidence. Crisis . 2004;25(4):147–
155. doi:10.1027/0227-5910.25.4.147.
178. Brunette MF, Mueser KT. Psychosocial interventions for the long-term
management of patients with severe mental illness and co-occurring
substance use disorder. J Clin Psychiatry . 2006;67(Suppl 7):10–17.
179. Dixon LB, Dickerson F, Bellack AS, et al. The 2009 schizophrenia
PORT psychosocial treatment recommendations and summary state-
ments. Schizophr Bull . 2010;36(1):48–70. doi:10.1093/schbul/sbp115.
180. Himelhoch S, Lehman A, Kreyenbuhl J, Daumit G, Brown C, Dixon L.
Prevalence of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease among those with
serious mental illness. Am J Psychiatry . 2004;161(12):2317–2319.
doi:10.1176/appi.ajp.161.12.2317.
181. Jurgens RCJ, Amon JJ, Baral S, Beyrer C. People who use drugs, HIV ,
and human rights. Lancet . 2010;376. doi:10.1016/S0140-6736(10)
60830-6.
182. Bronson J, Carson EA, BJS Statisticians. Prisoners in 2017, NCJ
252156. Bur Stat. 2019;April 30(2019). https://www.bjs.gov/content/
pub/pdf/p17.pdf.
183. Correctional Control. Incarceration and supervision by state. https://
www.prisonpolicy.org/reports/correctionalcontrol2018.html. Published
2018.
184. Justice Policy Institute. Substance abuse treatment and public safety.
http://www.justicepolicy.org/images/upload/08_01_rep_drugtx_ac-
ps.pdf. Published 2008.
185. Dolan KA, Wodak AD, Hall WD. Methadone maintenance treatment
reduces heroin injection in New South Wales prisons. Drug Alcohol Rev .
1998;17(2):153–158. doi:10.1080/09595239800186951.
186. Stover H, Michels I. Drug use and opioid substitution treatment for
prisoners. Harm Reduct J . 2010;7:17. doi:10.1186/1477-7517-7-17.
187. Alex B, Weiss DB, Kaba F, et al. Death after jail release. J Correct
Health Care . 2017;23(1):83–87. doi:10.1177/1078345816685311.
188. Cropsey KL, Villalobos GC, St Clair CL. Pharmacotherapy treatment in
substance-dependent correctional populations: a review. Subst Use
Misuse . 2005;40(13–14):1983–1999. 2043-2048. doi:10.1080/108260
80500294866.
189. Gordon M, Kinlock TW, Schwartz RP, O’Grady KE, Fitzgerald TT, V occi
FJ. A randomized clinical trial of buprenorphine for prisoners: Findings at
12-months post-release. Drug Alcohol Depend . 2017;172:34–42.
190. Moore KE, Roberts W, Reid HH, Smith KMZ, Oberleitner LMS, McKee
SA. Effectiveness of medication assisted treatment for opioid use in
prison and jail settings: A meta-analysis and systematic review. J Subst
Abuse Treat . 2019;99:32–43. doi:10.1016/j.jsat.2018.12.003.
191. Heimer R, Catania H, Newman RG, Zambrano J, Brunet A, Ortiz AM.
Methadone maintenance in prison: evaluation of a pilot program in
Puerto Rico. Drug Alcohol Depend . 2006;83(2):122–129. doi:10.1016/
j.drugalcdep.2005.11.004.
192. Green TC, Clarke J, Brinkley-Rubinstein L, et al. Postincarceration fatal
overdoses after implementing medications for addiction treatment in a
statewide correctional system. JAMA Psychiatry . 2018;75(4):405–407.
doi:10.1001/jamapsychiatry.2017.4614.
193. Marsden J, Stillwell G, Jones H, et al. Does exposure to opioid
substitution treatment in prison reduce the risk of death after release?
A national prospective observational study in England. Addiction .
2017;112(8):1408–1418. doi:10.1111/add.13779.White et el. /C15Adopted by the ASAM Board of Directors December 18, 2019
70 /C2232020 American Society of Addiction Medicine
Copyright © 2020 American Society of Addiction Medicine. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.194. National Commission on Correctional Health Care & National Sheriffs’
Association. Jail-based medication-assisted treatment: Promising prac-
tices, guidelines, and resources for the field. http://www.rsat-tta.com/
Files/Jail-Based-MAT-PPG-web. Published 2018.
195. Darke S, Kaye S, Finlay-Jones R. Drug use and injection risk-taking
among prison methadone maintenance patients. Addiction .
1998;93(8):1169–1175. doi:10.1046/j.1360-0443.1998.93811695.x.
196. Dolan KA, Shearer J, White B, Zhou J, Kaldor J, Wodak AD. Four-year
follow-up of imprisoned male heroin users and methadone treatment:
mortality, re-incarceration and hepatitis C infection. Addiction .
2005;100(6):820–828. doi:10.1111/j.1360-0443.2005.01050.x.
197. Bertram SGA. Views of Recidivists Released after Participating in the
N.S.W. Prison Methadone Program and the Problems They Faced in the
Community. Sydney, Australia: Department of Corrective Services;
1990.
198. Canada ARCRBCS. Institutional methadone maintenance treatment:
Impact on release outcome and institutional behaviour. http://
198.103.98.138/text/rsrch/reports/r119/r119_e.pdf.
199. Rich JD, McKenzie M, Larney S, et al. Methadone continuation versus
forced withdrawal on incarceration in a combined US prison and jail: a
randomised, open-label trial. The Lancet . 2015;386(9991):350–359.
doi:10.1016/s0140-6736(14)62338-2.
200. Brinkley-Rubinstein L, McKenzie M, Macmadu A. A randomized,
open-label trail of methadone continuation versus forced withdrawal
in a combined U.S. prison and jail: Findings at 12 months post-release.
Drug Alcohol Depend . 2018;184:57–63.
201. Magura S, Lee JD, Hershberger J, et al. Buprenorphine and methadone
maintenance in jail and post-release: a randomized clinical trial. Drug
Alcohol Depend . 2009;99(1–3):222–230. doi:10.1016/j.drugalcdep.
2008.08.006.
202. Coviello DM, Cornish JW, Lynch KG, et al. A multisite pilot study of
extended-release injectable naltrexone treatment for previously opioid-
dependent parolees and probationers. Subst Abus . 2012;33(1):48–59.
doi:10.1080/08897077.2011.609438.
203. National Commission on Correctional Health Care. Standards for opioid
treatment programs in correctional facilities. http://www.ncchc.org/
standards. Published 2004.
204. National Conference of State Legislatures. Drug Overdose Immunity
and Good Samaritan Laws. https://www.ncsl.org/research/civil-and-
criminal-justice/drug-overdose-immunity-good-samaritan-laws.aspx.
Published June 5, 2017.
205. American Society of Addiction Medicine. Public policy statement on
the use of naloxone for the prevention of drug overdose deaths. http://
www.asam.org/docs/default-source/publicy-policy-statements/1nalox-
one-rev-8-14.pdf. Published 2010.
206. Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration. Opioid
overdose prevention toolkit - Updated 2014. https://store.samhsa.gov/
product/Opioid-Overdose-Prevention-Toolkit/SMA18-4742. Published
2014.
207. Clarke SF, Dargan PI, Jones AL. Naloxone in opioid poisoning: walking
the tightrope. Emerg Med J . 2005;22(9):612–616. doi:10.1136/
emj.2003.009613.
208. Boyer EW. Management of opioid analgesic overdose. N Engl J Med .
2012;367(2):146–155. doi:10.1056/NEJMra1202561.
209. Dahan A, Aarts L, Smith TW. Incidence, reversal, and prevention of
opioid-induced respiratory depression. Anesthesiology . 2010;112(1):
226–238. doi:10.1097/ALN.0b013e3181c38c25.
210. Kerr D, Kelly AM, Dietze P, Jolley D, Barger B. Randomized controlled
trial comparing the effectiveness and safety of intranasal and intramus-
cular naloxone for the treatment of suspected heroin overdose.
Addiction . 2009;104(12):2067–2074. doi:10.1111/j.1360-0443.2009.
02724.x.
211. Krieter PA, Chiang CN, Gyaw S, McCann DJ. Comparison of the
pharmacokinetic properties of naloxone following the use of FDA-
approved intranasal and intramuscular devices versus a common impro-
vised nasal naloxone device. J Clin Pharmacol . 2019. doi:10.1002/
jcph.1401.212. Giglio RE, Li G, DiMaggio CJ. Effectiveness of bystander naloxone
administration and overdose education programs: a meta-analysis. Inj
Epidemiol . 2015;2(1):10. doi:10.1186/s40621-015-0041-8.
213. Goldberg SA, Dworkis DA, Liao VT, et al. Feasibility of Bystander
Administration of Public-Access Naloxone for Opioid Overdose. Pre-
hospital Emerg Care Off J Natl Assoc EMS Physicians Natl Assoc State
EMS Dir . 2018;22(6):788–794. doi:10.1080/10903127.2018.1461284.
214. Fisher R, O’Donnell D, Ray B, Rusyniak D. Police Officers Can Safely
and Effectively Administer Intranasal Naloxone. Prehospital Emerg
Care Off J Natl Assoc EMS Physicians Natl Assoc State EMS Dir .
2016;20(6):675–680. doi:10.1080/10903127.2016.1182605.
215. Drug Enforcement Administration. Drugs of abuse: a DEA resource
guide.
APPENDICES
Appendix I: Included Clinical Guidelines and
Systematic Reviews:
Guidelines Included for the 2015 Publication:
1. Baltimore Buprenorphine Initia tive. Clinical guidelines for
buprenorphine treatment of opioid dependence in the Balti-
more Buprenorphine Initiative. Baltimore, MD; 2011.
2. Bell J, Kimber J, Lintzeris N, et al. Clinical guidelines
and procedures for the use of naltrexone in the manage-
ment of opioid dependence. Commonwealth of Australia:
National Drug Strategy; 2003.
3. Bell, J. The role of supervision of dosing in opioid
maintenance treatment. London: National Addiction
Centre; 2007. Brooking, A. Guidelines for the manage-
ment of opiate dependent patients at RCHT. Royal Corn-
wall Hospitals: NHS; 2010.
4. Chou R, Cruciani RA, Fiellin DA, et al. Methadone
safety: a clinical practice guideline from the American
Pain Society and College on Problems of Drug Depen-
dence, in collaboration with the Heart Rhythm Society. J
Pain. 2014;15(4):321– 337.
5. Chou R, Weimer MB, Dana T. Methadone overdose and
cardiac arrhythmia potential: Findings from a review of
evidence for an American Pain Society and College on
Problems of Drug Dependence Clinical Practice Guide-
line. J Pain. 2014; 15(4):338–365.
6. Committee on Health Care for Underserved Women and
the American Society of Addiction Medicine. Opioid
abuse, dependence, and addiction in pregnancy. 2012;
Committee Opinion Number 524.
7. Department of Health (England) and the Devolved Admin-
istrations. Drug misuse and dependence: UK guidelines on
clinical management. London: Department of Health
(England), the Scottish Government, Welsh Assembly
Government and Northern Ireland Executive; 2007.
8. Federal Bureau of Prisons Clinical Practice Guidelines.
Detoxification of Chemically Dependent Inmates. Wash-
ington, DC; 2009.
9. Ford A. WPCT Guidelines-Methadone and Buprenor-
phine in the Management of Opioid Dependence. Pre-
scribing Guidelines for the Young Person’s Substance
Use Service —SPACE. Worchester: NHS; 2009./C15Adopted by the ASAM Board of Directors December 18, 2019 NPG for the Treatment of Opioid Use Disorder
/C2232020 American Society of Addiction Medicine 71
Copyright © 2020 American Society of Addiction Medicine. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.10. Ford C, Halliday K, Lawson E, Browne E. Guidance for
the use of substitute prescribing in the treatment of opioid
dependence in primary care. London: Royal College of
General Practitioners; 2011.
11. Gowing L, Ali R, Dunlap A, Farrell M, Lintzeris N.
National guidelines for medication-assisted treatment of
opioid dependence. Commonwealth of Australia; 2014.
12. Handford C, Kahan M, Lester MD, & Ordean A. Bupre-
norphine/naloxone for opioid dependence: Clinical prac-
tice guideline. Canada: Centre for Addiction and Mental
Health; 2012.
13. Hanna, M. Supporting Recovery from Opioid Addiction:
Community Care Best Practice Guidelines for Buprenor-
phine and Suboxone1. USA: Community Care Behav-
ioral Health Organization; 2013.
14. Henry-Edwards S, Gowing L, White J, et al. Clinical
Guidelines and Procedures for the Use of Methadone in
the Maintenance Treatment of Opioid Dependence. Com-
monwealth of Australia: National Drug Strategy; 2003.
15. Hudak ML, Tan RC. The Committee on Drugs, & The
Committee on Fetus and Newborn. Neonatal Drug With-
drawal. Pediatrics. 2012;129(2):e540–560.
16. Johnston A, Mandell TW, Meyer M. Treatment of Opioid
Dependence in Pregnancy: Vermont Guidelines. Burling-
ton: VT; 2010.
17. Lintzeris N, Clark N, Muhleisen P, et al. Clinical guidelines:
buprenorphine treatment of heroin dependence. Common-
wealth of Australia: Public Health Division; 2003.
18. The Management of Substance Use Disorder Working
Group. V A/DoD Clinical Practice Guideline for manage-
ment of substance use disorders (SUDs). Version
2.0; 2009.
19. Ministry of Health. New Zealand Clinical Guidelines for
the Use of Buprenorphine (with or without Naloxone) in
the Treatment of Opioid Dependence. Wellington: Min-
istry of Health; 2010.
20. Ministry of Health. Practice Guidelines for Opioid Sub-
stitution Treatment in New Zealand 2008. Wellington:
Ministry of Health; 2008.
21. Nicholls L, Bragaw L, Ruetsch C. Opioid Dependence
Treatment and Guidelines. J Manag Care Pharm. 2010;
16(Suppl1b):S14–S21.
22. Stephenson D. Guideline for physicians working in
California opioid treatment programs. San Francisco,
CA: California Society of Addiction Medicine. CSAM
Committee on Treatment of Opioid Dependence; 2008.
23. Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Adminis-
tration. (2012). An Introduction to Extended-Release
Injectable Naltrexone for the Treatment of People With
Opioid Dependence. Advisory. 2012;11(1):1–8.
24. Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Adminis-
tration. Addressing Viral Hepatitis in People With Sub-
stance Use Disorders. Treatment Improvement Protocol
(TIP) Series 53. HHS Publication No. (SMA) 11-4656.
Rockville, MD: Substance Abuse and Mental Health
Services Administration; 2011.
25. Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Adminis-
tration Center for Substance Abuse Treatment. Clinical
Guidelines for the Use of Buprenorphine in the Treatmentof Opioid Addiction. Treatment Improvement Protocol
(TIP) Series 40. DHHS Publication No. (SMA) 04-3939.
Rockville, MD: Substance Abuse and Mental Health
Services Administration; 2004.
26. Substance Abuse and Mental Health Service Adminis-
tration Center for Substance Abuse Treatment. Detoxifi-
cation and Substance Abuse Treatment. Treatment
Improvement Protocol (TIP) Series 45. DHHS Publica-
tion No. (SMA) 06-4131. Rockville, MD: Substance
Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration; 2006.
27. Substance Abuse and Mental Health Service Adminis-
tration Center for Substance Abuse Treatment. Medica-
tion-Assisted Treatment for Opioid Addiction in Opioid
Treatment Programs. Treatment Improvement Protocol
(TIP) Series 43. HHS Publication No. (SMA) 12-4214.
Rockville, MD: Substance Abuse and Mental Health
Services Administration; 2005.
28. Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Adminis-
tration. Quick Guide for Physicians Based on Tip 40:
Clinical Guidelines for the Use of Buprenorphine in the
Treatment of Opioid Addiction. Treatment Improvement
Protocol (TIP) Series 40. DHHS Publication No. (SMA)
05-4003. Rockville, MD: Substance Abuse and Mental
Health Services Administration; 2005.
29. The College of Physicians and Surgeons of Ontario.
Methadone Maintenance Treatment Program Standards
and Clinical Guidelines. 4th ed. Toronto, Ontario; 2011.
30. Verster A, Buning E. Methadone Guidelines. Amster-
dam: Netherlands: Euro-Meth; 2000.
31. Vermont Department of Health. Vermont Buprenorphine
Practice Guidelines. Burlington, VT; 2010.
32. Weimer MB, Chou R. Research gaps on methadone
harms and comparative harms: findings from a review
of the evidence for an American Pain Society and College
on Problems of Drug Dependence Clinical Practice
Guideline. J Pain. 2014; 15(4): 366–376.
33. World Health Organization. Department of Mental
Health, Substance Abuse and World Health Organiza-
tion. Guidelines for the psychosocially assisted pharma-
cological treatment of opioid dependence. World Health
Organization; 2009.
Guidelines Included for the 2019 Focused
Update:
1. Bruneau, J., Ahamad, K., Goyer, M. E `., Poulin, G., Selby,
P., Fischer, B., ...Wood, E. (2018). Management of
opioid use disorders: A national clinical practice guide-
line. Canadian Medical Association Journal, 190(9),
E247-E257.
2. Cleveland, L. M. (2016). Breastfeeding recommenda-
tions for women who receive medication-assisted treat-
ment for opioid use disorders: AWHONN Practice Brief
Number 4. Nursing for Women’s Health, 20(4), 432-434.
3. Committee on Obstetric Practice. (2017). Committee
Opinion No. 711: Opioid Use and Opioid Use Disorder
in Pregnancy. Obstetrics and Gynecology, 130(2), e81.
4. Crowley, R., Kirschner, N., Dunn, A. S., & Bornstein, S.
S. (2017). Health and public policy to facilitate effective
prevention and treatment of substance use disordersWhite et el. /C15Adopted by the ASAM Board of Directors December 18, 2019
72 /C2232020 American Society of Addiction Medicine
Copyright © 2020 American Society of Addiction Medicine. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.involving illicit and prescription drugs: An American
College of Physicians position paper. Annals of Internal
Medicine, 166(10), 733-736
5. Department of Veterans Affairs, & Department of
Defense. (2015). VA/DoD clinical practice guideline
for the management of substance use disorders. Retrieved
September 9, 2018, from https://www.healthquality.va.-
gov/guidelines/MH/sud/VADoDSUDCPGRevi-
sed22216.pdf
6. Dowell, D., Haegerich, T. M., & Chou, R. (2016). CDC
guideline for prescribing opioids for chronic pain —
United States, 2016. JAMA, 315(15), 1624-1645.
7. Dunlap, B., & Cifu, A. S. (2016). Clinical management of
opioid use disorder. JAMA, 316(3), 338-339.
8. Levy, S., Ryan, S. A., Gonzalez, P. K., Patrick, S. W.,
Quigley, J., Siqueira, L., ...Jarrett, R. (2016). Medica-
tion-assisted treatment of adolescents with opioid use
disorders. Pediatrics, 138(3).
9. National Commission on Correctional Health Care &
National Sheriffs’ Association. (2018). Jail-based medi-
cation-assisted treatment: Promising practices, guide-
lines, and resources for the field. Retrieved October
16, 2018, from http://www.rsat-tta.com/Files/Jail-
Based-MAT-PPG-web
10. Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Adminis-
tration (SAMHSA). (2018). Tip 63: Medications for
opioid use disorders. (HHS Publication No. [SMA] 18-
5063EXSUMM). Rockville, MD.
11. Wright, N., D’agnone, O., Krajci, P., Littlewood, R.,
Alho, H., Reimer, J., ...Maremmani, I. (2016). Address-
ing misuse and diversion of opioid substitution medica-
tion: Guidance based on systematic evidence review and
real-world experience. Journal of Public Health, 38(3),
e368-e374.
Systematic Reviews Included for the 2019
Focused Update:
1. Ainscough, T. S., McNeill, A., Strang, J., Calder, R., &
Brose, L. S. (2017). Contingency Management interven-
tions for non-prescribed drug use during treatment for
opiate addiction: A systematic review and meta-analysis.
Drug and Alcohol Dependence, 178, 318-339.
2. Bene ´itez, M. C., & Gil-Alegre, M. E. (2017). Opioid
addiction: Social problems associated and implications
of both current and possible future treatments, including
polymeric therapeutics for giving up the habit of opioid
consumption. BioMed Research International, 2017.
3. Bentzley, B. S., Barth, K. S., Back, S. E., & Book, S. W.
(2015). Discontinuation of buprenorphine maintenance
therapy: Perspectives and outcomes. Journal of Sub-
stance Abuse Treatment, 52, 48-57.
4. Bi-Mohammed, Z., Wright, N. M., Hearty, P., King, N., &
Gavin, H. (2017). Prescription opioid abuse in prison
settings: A systematic review of prevalence, practice and
treatment responses. Drug and Alcohol Dependence,
171, 122-131.
5. Brogly, S. B., Saia, K. A., Walley, A. Y., Du, H. M., &
Sebastiani, P. (2014). Prenatal buprenorphine versus
methadone exposure and neonatal outcomes: Systematicreview and meta-analysis. American Journal of Epide-
miology, 180(7), 673-686.
6. Chou, R., Korthuis, P. T., Weimer, M., Bougatsos, C.,
Blazina, I., Zakher, B., ...McCarty, D. (2016). Medica-
tion-assisted treatment models of care for opioid use
disorder in primary care settings. Technical Brief No.
28. Rockville, MD: Agency for Healthcare Research
and Quality.
7. Connery, H. S. (2015). Medication-assisted treatment of
opioid use disorder: Review of the evidence and future
directions. Harvard Review of Psychiatry, 23(2), 63-75.
8. .Ecker, A. H., & Hundt, N. (2017, July 31). Posttraumatic
stress disorder in opioid agonist therapy: A review.
Psychological Trauma: Theory, Research, Practice, and
Policy. Advance online publication. doi: 10.1037/
tra0000312
9. Gowing, L., Ali, R., & White, J. M. (2017a). Opioid
antagonists with minimal sedation for opioid withdrawal.
Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews, 2017(5).
10. Gowing, L., Ali, R., White, J. M., & Mbewe, D. (2017b).
Buprenorphine for managing opioid withdrawal.
Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews, 2017(2).
11. Gowing, L., Farrell, M., Ali, R., & White, J. M. (2016).
Alpha2-adrenergic agonists for the management of opi-
oid withdrawal. Cochrane Database of Systematic
Reviews, 2016(5).
12. Harricharan, S., & Farah, K. (2017). CADTH Rapid
Response Reports. Buprenorphine formulations for the
treatment of opioid use disorders: A review of compara-
tive clinical effectiveness, cost-effectiveness and guide-
lines. Ottawa (ON), Canadian Agency for Drugs and
Technologies in Health (CADTH).
13. Hassan, A. N., Howe, A. S., Samokhvalov, A. V., Le Foll,
B., & George, T. P. (2017). Management of mood and
anxiety disorders in patients receiving opioid agonist
therapy: Review and meta-analysis. The American Jour-
nal on Addictions, 26(6), 551-563.
14. He, F., Jiang, Y., & Li, L. (2016). The effect of naloxone
treatment on opioid-induced side effects: A meta-analy-
sis of randomized and controlled trails. Medicine, 95(37).
15. Institute for Clinical and Economic Review (ICER).
(2018). Extended-Release Opioid Agonists and Antago-
nist Medications for Addiction Treatment (MAT) in
Patients with Opioid Use Disorder: Effectiveness and
Value. Retrieved, October 26, 2018, from https://icer-
review.org/material/mat-evidence-report/
16. Klaman, S. L., Isaacs, K., Leopold, A., Perpich, J.,
Hayashi, S., Vender, J., ...Jones, H. E. (2017). Treating
women who are pregnant and parenting for opioid use
disorder and the concurrent care of their infants and
children: literature review to support national guidance.
Journal of Addiction Medicine, 11(3), 178.
17. Larney, S., Gowing, L., Mattick, R. P., Farrell, M., Hall,
W., & Degenhardt, L. (2014). A systematic review and
meta-analysis of naltrexone implants for the treatment of
opioid dependence. Drug and Alcohol Review, 33(2),
115-128.
18. Ma, J., Bao, Y. P., Wang, R. J., Su, M. F., Liu, M. X., Li, J.
Q., ...Lu, L. (2018). Effects of medication-assisted/C15Adopted by the ASAM Board of Directors December 18, 2019 NPG for the Treatment of Opioid Use Disorder
/C2232020 American Society of Addiction Medicine 73
Copyright © 2020 American Society of Addiction Medicine. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.treatment on mortality among opioids users: A system-
atic review and meta-analysis. Molecular Psychiatry.
19. McAuley, A., Aucott, L., & Matheson, C. (2015). Explor-
ing the life-saving potential of naloxone: A systematic
review and descriptive meta-analysis of take home nal-
oxone (THN) programmes for opioid users. International
Journal of Drug Policy, 26(12), 1183-1188.
20. Mitchell, K. D., & Higgins, L. J. (2016). Combating
opioid overdose with public access to naloxone. Journal
of Addictions Nursing, 27(3), 160-179.
21. Nielsen, S., Larance, B., Degenhardt, L., Gowing, L.,
Kehler, C., & Lintzeris, N. (2016). Opioid agonist treat-
ment for pharmaceutical opioid dependent people.
Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews, 2016(5).
22. Nolan, S., Klimas, J., & Wood, E. (2016). Alcohol use in
opioid agonist treatment. Addiction Science & Clinical
Practice, 11(1).
23. Noormohammadi, A., Forinash, A., Yancey, A., Cran-
nage, E., Campbell, K., & Shyken, J. (2016). Buprenor-
phine versus methadone for opioid dependence in
pregnancy. Annals of Pharmacotherapy, 50(8), 666-672.
24. Oueslati, B., Moula, O., & Ghachem, R. (2018). The
impact of OPRM1’s genetic polymorphisms on metha-
done maintenance treatment in opioid addicts: a system-
atic review. Pharmacogenomics, 19(8), 741-747.
25. Reimer, J., Wright, N., Somaini, L., Roncero, C., Mar-
emmani, I., McKeganey, N., ...D’Agonne, O. (2016).
The impact of misuse and diversion of opioid substitution
treatment medicines: evidence review and expert con-
sensus. European addiction research, 22(2), 99-106.
26. Saulle, R., Vecchi, S., & Gowing, L. (2017). Supervised
dosing with a long-acting opioid medication in the
management of opioid dependence. Cochrane Database
of Systematic Reviews, 2017(4).
27. Sokol, R., LaVertu, A. E., Morrill, D., Albanese, C., &
Schuman-Olivier, Z. (2018). Group-based treatment
of opioid use disorder with buprenorphine: A systematicreview. Journal of Substance Abuse Treatment, 84,
78-87.
28. Sordo, L., Barrio, G., Bravo, M. J., Indave, B. I., Degen-
hardt, L., Wiessing, L., ...Pastor-Barriuso, R. (2017).
Mortality risk during and after opioid substitution treat-
ment: Systematic review and meta-analysis of cohort
studies. BMJ, 357, j1550.
29. Srivastava, A., Kahan, M., & Nader, M. (2017). Primary
care management of opioid use disorders: Abstinence,
methadone, or buprenorphine-naloxone? Canadian Fam-
ily Physician, 63(3), 200-205.
30. Taveros, M. C., & Chuang, E. J. (2017). Pain manage-
ment strategies for patients on methadone maintenance
therapy: A systematic review of the literature. BMJ
Supportive & Palliative Care, 7(4), 383-389.
31. Timko, C., Schultz, N. R., Cucciare, M. A., Vittorio, L.,
& Garrison-Diehn, C. (2016). Retention in medication-
assisted treatment for opiate dependence: A systematic
review. Journal of Addictive Diseases, 35(1), 22-35.
32. Tran, T. H., Griffin, B. L., Stone, R. H., Vest, K. M., &
Todd, T. J. (2017). Methadone, buprenorphine, and nal-
trexone for the treatment of opioid use disorder in
pregnant women. Pharmacotherapy: The Journal
of Human Pharmacology and Drug Therapy, 37(7),
824-839.
33. Tsai, L. C., & Doan, T. J. (2016). Breastfeeding among
mothers on opioid maintenance treatment: a literature
review. Journal of Human Lactation, 32(3), 521-529.
34. Voon, P., Karamouzian, M., & Kerr, T. (2017). Chronic
pain and opioid misuse: A review of reviews. Substance
Abuse Treatment, Prevention, and Policy, 12(1), 36
35. Zedler, B. K., Mann, A. L., Kim, M. M., Amick, H. R.,
Joyce, A. R., Murrelle, E. L., & Jones, H. E. (2016).
Buprenorphine compared with methadone to treat preg-
nant women with opioid use disorder: a systematic
review and meta-analysis of safety in the mother, fetus
and child. Addiction, 111(12), 2115-2128.White et el. /C15Adopted by the ASAM Board of Directors December 18, 2019
74 /C2232020 American Society of Addiction Medicine
Copyright © 2020 American Society of Addiction Medicine. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.Appendix II: Bioequivalence Information and Charts
Available formulations of buprenorphine vary in bioequivalence as observed in pharmacokinetic studies. When
transitioning patients between different formulations of buprenorphine bioavailability should be considered. Patients being
switched between formulations should be started on an equivalent dosage as the previously administered product. However,
dosage adjustments may be necessary when transitioning between products. Patients should be monitored for symptoms related
to overdosing or underdosing. Corresponding dosage strengths are detailed below.
Suboxone or
generic
equivalent
(sublingual
tablet)Suboxone or
generic
equivalent
(sublingual
film)Zubsolv
(sublingual
tablet)Bunavail
(buccal film)Cassipa
(sublingual
film)Generic equiv.
of Subutex
(sublingual
tablet)Sublocadey
(subcutaneous
injection)Brixadi
(SC injection)z
2 mg bup/ 0.5 mg
nal tablet2 mg bup/ 0.5 mg
nal filmOne 1.4 mg bup/0.36
mg nal tablet2 mg bup tablet
4 mg bup/ 1 mg nal
(taken as: two
2 mg bup/0.5 mg
nal tablets)4 mg bup/ 1 mg
nal filmOne 2.9 mg bup/
0.71 mg nal
tabletOne 2.1 mg/
0.3 mg nal
filmTwo 2 mg bup
tablets
8m g b u p / 2m g n a l
tablet8m g b u p / 2m g
nal filmOne 5.7mg/1.4 mg
nal tabletOne 4.2mg/0.7 mg
nal filmOne 8 mg bup tablet 100 mg 16 mg SC bup
weekly
injection; or
64 mg SC bup
monthly
injection
12 mg bup/3 mg nal
(Taken as: One
and a half 8 mg
bup/2 mg nal
tablets or one
8 mg bup/2 mg
nal tablets plus
two 2 mg bup/
2 mg nal
tablets)12 mg bup/3 mg
nal filmOne 8.6 mg bup/2.1
mg nal tabletOne 6.3mg/1 mg
nal film12 mg bup (Taken
as: One and a
half 8 mg bup
tablets or one
8m gb u p
tablets plus two
2m gb u p
tablets)
16 mg bup/4 mg nal
(taken as:
Two 8 mg bup/2 mg
nal tablets)16 mg bup/4 mg
nal (taken as:
Two 8 mg bup/
2m g n a l
films)One 11.4 mg bup/
2.9 mg nal
tabletTwo 4.2 mg bup/
0.7 mg nal
films16 mg bup/
4 mg nal/C316 mg bup (taken
as: Two 8 mg
bup tablets)24 mg SC bup
weekly
injection; or
96 mg SC bup
monthly
injection
24 mg bup/6 mg nal
(taken as:
three 8 mg bup/3 mg
nal tablets)24 mg bup/6 mg
nal (taken as:
Two 12 mg bup/
3m g n a l
films)17.2 mg bup/4.1 mg
nal (Taken as:
Two 8.6 mg
bup/2.1 mg nal
tablets)Two 6.3 mg bup/1
mg nal films24 mg bup (taken
as: Three 8 mg
bup tablets)300 mg 32 mg SC bup
weekly
injection; or
128 mg SC bup
monthly
injection
/C3In a pharmacokinetic study, the 16 mg/4 mg dose of CASSIPA showed comparable relative bioavailability of buprenorphine and naloxone compared with th e same dose of
buprenorphine/naloxone administered sublingually, as two 8 mg/2 mg sublingual films.
yThe recommended dose of SUBLOCADE following induction and dose adjustment with transmucosal buprenorphine is 300 mg monthly for the first two months followed by a
maintenance dose of 100 mg monthly. The maintenance dose may be increased to 300 mg monthly for patients who tolerate the 100 mg dose, but do not demonstr ate a satisfactory
clinical response, as evidenced by self–reported illicit opioid use or urine drug screens positive for illicit opioid use.
zBrixadi received tentative approval from the FDA in 2018 and is eligible for marketing approval on November 30, 2020/C15Adopted by the ASAM Board of Directors December 18, 2019 NPG for the Treatment of Opioid Use Disorder
/C2232020 American Society of Addiction Medicine 75
Copyright © 2020 American Society of Addiction Medicine. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.Appendix III: Overview of Opioid Use Disorder Pharmacotherapy Options
Generic NameFor the Treat-
ment of EffectsPotential Side
Effects Advantages Disadvantages Regulatory
Methadone
Methadone Opioid withdrawal
management;
Ongoing
treatment of
opioid use
disorderImproved retention in
treatment,
reduced
withdrawal
symptoms and
cravings, reduced
illicit opioid use,
reduced mortality
riskConstipation,
hyperhidrosis,
respiratory
depression
(particularly
combined with
benzodiazepines or
other CNS
depressants),
sedation, QT
prolongation,
interactions with
other medications
that alter cytochrome
P450 metabolism,
sexual dysfunction,
severe hypotension
including orthostatic
hypotension and
syncope, misuse
potential, NOWSStrongest retention in
treatment;
improved social
functioning;
associated with
reductions in
criminal activity
and recidivism;
and infectious
disease
acquisition and
transmissionMore frequent clinic
visits, only
SAMHSA-
certified OTPs
may provide
methadone for
addiction
treatment, higher
risk for
respiratory
depression due to
long half-life and
stacking effect
(requires more
monitoring)Only federally
certified and
accredited OTPs
can dispense
methadone for
the treatment of
OUD.
Exceptions include:
administering
(not prescribing)
an opioid for no
more than 3 days
to a patient in
acute opioid
withdrawal while
preparations are
made for
ongoing care;
administering
opioid
medications in a
hospital to
maintain or
detoxify a patient
as an ‘‘incidental
adjunct to
medical or
surgical
treatment of
conditions other
than addiction.
Buprenorphine
Buprenorphine (with
or without
naloxone)Opioid withdrawal
management;
Ongoing
treatment of
opioid use
disorderImproved retention in
treatment at
doses of 16 mg
or higher,
reduced
withdrawal
symptoms and
cravings, reduced
illicit opioid use,
reduced mortalityConstipation, nausea,
precipitated
withdrawal,
excessive sweating,
insomnia, peripheral
edema, respiratory
depression when
with benzodiazepines
or other CNS
depressants, misuse
potential, NOWS
Implant: Nerve damage
during insertion/
removal, accidental
overdose or misuse
if extruded, local
migration or
protrusion
Subcutaneous: Injection
site itching or pain,
death from
intravenous injectionCeiling effects on
respiratory
depression, more
rapid induction
to steady state
dose, less
potential for
euphoria
(compared to
methadone),
considered safe
for office-based
treatment;
improved social
functioning;
associated with
reductions in
criminal activity
and recidivism;
and infectious
disease
acquisition and
transmissionRequires X-Waiver to
prescribe; risk
for overdose
when combined
with alcohol,
benzodiazepines,
or other sedativesMust have a waiver
to prescribe
buprenorphine
for OUD (OTPs
can dispense
buprenorphine
under OTP
regulations
without using a
federal waiver);
Subject to patient
limits;
Prescribing
buprenorphine
implants or
extended release
injectables
requires REMS
Program
certification
specific to
formulation
Naltrexone
Naltrexone Prevention of relapse
to opioid use
disorder
following
complete opioid
withdrawalReduced illicit opioid
use, reduced
cravingsNausea, anxiety,
insomnia,
precipitated
withdrawal,
hepatotoxicity,
vulnerability to
opioid overdose,
depression,
suicidality, muscle
cramps, dizziness or
syncope, somnolence
or sedation, anorexia,
decreased appetite or
other appetite
disorders
Intramuscular: Pain,
swelling, induration
(including some
cases requiring
surgical intervention)No risk for misuse or
physiological
dependence; no
special regulatory
requirements;
improved social
functioning;
associated with
reductions in
criminal activity
and recidivism;
and infectious
disease
acquisition and
transmissionPatients must be fully
withdrawn from
opioids before
beginning
treatment, lower
retention in
treatment, high
rates of
medication
nonadherence,
has not been
demonstrated to
reduce mortality
(and may
increase
mortality risk
after medication
discontinuation)Any healthcare
provider with
prescribing
authority can
prescribe or
administer
naltrexoneWhite et el. /C15Adopted by the ASAM Board of Directors December 18, 2019
76 /C2232020 American Society of Addiction Medicine
Copyright © 2020 American Society of Addiction Medicine. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.Appendix IV: Available Pharmacotherapy Formulations
GENERIC/TRADE
NAMEMU-OPIOID
RECEPTOR
EFFECTFOR THE
TREATMENT
OFFORMULA-
TIONSAVAILABLE
STRENGTHSCOMMON
MAINTE-
NANCE DOSESTANDARD
DOSING REGI-
MEN
Methadone (Methadose,
Dolophine)Full agonist Opioid withdrawal
and opioid use
disorderLiquid concentrate,
tablet, oral
solution of
powder or
dispersible tablettablet: 5 mg, 10mg
dispersible tablet:
40mg
oral solution: 5mg/
5 mL, 10mg/5mL
oral concentrate
solution: 10mg/
mLRange: 60 to 120 mg Once daily (or split
dosing when
appropriate)
Generic buprenorphine
monoproductPartial agonist Opioid withdrawal
and opioid use
disorderSublingual tablet 2 mg
8m g16 mg
Range: 4 mg to 24
mg/C3Daily
Generic buprenorphine/
naloxoneyPartial agonist
combined
with antagonistOpioid withdrawal
and opioid use
disorderSublingual tablet 2 mg/0.5 mg
8 mg/2 mg16 mg/4 mg
Range: 4 mg/1 mg to
24 mg/6 mg/C3Daily
Buprenorphine/naloxoney
(Zubsolv)Partial agonist
combined
with antagonist;Opioid withdrawal
and opioid use
disorderSublingual tablet 0.7 mg/0.18 mg
1.4 mg/0.36 mg
2.9 mg/0.71 mg
5.7 mg/1.4 mg
8.6 mg/2.1 mg
11.4 mg/2.9 mg11.4 mg/2.9 mg
Range: 2.9 mg/0.71
mg to 17.2 mg/
4.2 mgDaily
Buprenorphine/naloxoney
(Bunavail)Partial agonist
combined
with antagonistOpioid withdrawal
and opioid use
disorderBuccal film 2.1 mg/0.3 mg
4.2 mg/0.7 mg
6.3 mg/1 mg8.4 mg/1.4 mg
Range: 2.1 mg/0.3
mg to 12.6 mg/
2.1 mgDaily
Buprenorphine/naloxoney
(Suboxone)Partial agonist
combined with
antagonistOpioid withdrawal
and opioid use
disorderSublingual film; may
also be
administered
buccally2 mg/0.5 mg
4 mg/1 mg
8 mg/2 mg
12 mg/3 mg16 mg/4 mg
Range: 4 mg/1 mg to
24 mg/6 mg/C3Daily
Buprenorphine/naloxoney
(Cassipa)Partial agonist
combined
with antagonistOpioid withdrawal
and opioid use
disorderSublingual film 16 mg/4 mg 16 mg/4 mg
Range: 16–24 mgDaily
Buprenorphine
(Probuphine)Partial agonist Treatment of opioid
use disorder in
clinically stable
patients taking 8
mg/day or less of
buprenorphine or
buprenorphine/
naltrexone tablet
equivalentsImplants 80 mg/implant 4 implants for
6 months of
treatmentImplants last for
6 months and are
then removed,
after which a
second set can be
inserted
Extended-release injection
buprenorphine
(Sublocade)Partial agonist Moderate to severe
opioid use
disorder in
patients who have
initiated
treatment with
transmucosal
buprenorphine
followed by dose
adjustment for a
minimum of 7
daysSubcutaneous
injection100mg
300mgCommon monthly
dose: 300 mg for
the first 2
months; 100 mg
thereafter
Range: 100 mg to
300 mg monthlyMonthly
Extended-release injection
buprenorphine (Brixadi)Partial agonist Initiation,
stabilization, and
maintenance
treatment of
opioid use
disorderSubcutaneous
injection (Weekly
or Monthly)Weekly: 8 mg, 16 mg,
24 mg, 32 mg
Monthly: 64 mg,
96 mg, 128 mg24 mg SC weekly;
Range: 8–32 mg
or 96 mg SC
monthly; Range
64–128mgWeekly or Monthly
Oral naltrexone
(Revia)Antagonist For the blockade of
the effects of
exogenously
administered
opioids.Oral tablet 50 mg 50 mg
Range: 25–50 mgOnce daily (also
alternative off-
label regimens)
Extended-release injection
naltrexone (Vivitrol)Antagonist Prevention of relapse
to opioid use
disorder
following
complete opioid
withdrawalIntramuscular
injection380 mg 380 mg monthly
Range: 380 mg every
3–4 weeksOnce monthly by
injection/C6
/C3Dosages above 24 mg buprenorphine or 24 mg/6 mg buprenorphine/naloxone per day have not shown clinical advantage.
/C6Dosing every 3–4 weeks may be appropriate for some patients.
ynaloxone not absorbed when taken as prescribed./C15Adopted by the ASAM Board of Directors December 18, 2019 NPG for the Treatment of Opioid Use Disorder
/C2232020 American Society of Addiction Medicine 77
Copyright © 2020 American Society of Addiction Medicine. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.Appendix V: 2019 Guideline Committee Member Relationships with Industry and Other Entities
Guideline
Committee
Member Salary ConsultantSpeakers
BureauOwnership/
Partnership/
PrincipalInstitutional,
Organiza-
tional or
other finan-
cial benefit ResearchExpert
Witness
Chinazo O. Cunningham,
MD, MS, FASAMAlbert Einstein
College of
Medicine –
Professor of
MedicineNone None General Electric
Health/C3/C3None None None
Quest Diagnostics Data Safety Monitoring
Board - Spouse
Mark Edlund, MD RTI International –
Senior Research
Public Health
AnalystNone None American Psychiatric
Association –
MemberNone None None
Centers for Disease
Control and
Prevention/C3/C3
Patient-Centered
Outcomes
Research
Institute/C3/C3
Marc Fishman, MD,
DFASAMMaryland Treatment
Centers –
Medical
Director, CEOAlkermes/C3/C3None Maryland Treatment
Centers/C3/C3None Alkermes/C3/C3- Research
GrantRepresented
plaintiff in
class action
lawsuit
alleging
managed care
criteria for
utilization
management
violated
standard of
care/C3/C3
US WorldMeds/C3/C3National Institute on
Drug Abuse/C3/C3-
Research GrantRepresented
plaintiff in
allegation that
a patient was
denied access
to care based
on overly
restrictive
criteria/C3/C3
Danya/Mid
Atlantic
ATTC/C3/C3Represented
defendant in
an allegation
that physician
and treatment
center were
responsible for
data of
patient/C3/C3
NADCP/C3/C3
Verily/C3/C3
Adam J. Gordon, MD,
MPH, FACP,
DFASAMUniversity of Utah
School of
Medicine –
Professor of
MedicineNone None AMERSA/C3- Board of
Directors,
Substance Abuse
Journal Editor-in-
ChiefNone National Institutes of
Health –
Research GrantNone
Salt Lake City V A
Health Care
System –
Psychiatry/Chief
of MedicineVeterans Health
Administration/C3/C3Veterans Health
Administration –
Research Grant
Hendree Jones, PhD University of North
Carolina
Department of
OB/GYN –
ProfessorBayMark/C3None None None None None
UNC Horizons –
Executive
Director
Kyle M. Kampman,
MD, FASAM
(Chair )Perelman School of
Medicine –
Professor of
PsychiatryUS World
Meds/C3None Addiction Psychiatry
FellowshipNone Alkermes – Clinical
Trial on use of
naltrexone in
conjunction with
buprenorphine in
adults with OUD
transitioning from
buprenorphine
maintenance prior
to first dose of
vivitrolNoneWhite et el. /C15Adopted by the ASAM Board of Directors December 18, 2019
78 /C2232020 American Society of Addiction Medicine
Copyright © 2020 American Society of Addiction Medicine. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.(Continued )
Guideline
Committee
Member Salary ConsultantSpeakers
BureauOwnership/
Partnership/
PrincipalInstitutional,
Organiza-
tional or
other finan-
cial benefit ResearchExpert
Witness
Alkermes/C3National Institute on
Drug Abuse –
Clinical Trial on
cariprazine for
cocaine use
disorder
Allergan/C3
Indivior
Marjorie Meyer, MD University of
Vermont –
Associate
ProfessorNone None University of Vermont
Medical CenterNone None None
Daniel Langleben, MD University of
Pennsylvania -
ProfessorAlkermes/C3/C3None None None None None
Sandra A. Springer,
MD, FASAMYale School of
Medicine –
Associate
Professor of
MedicineAlkermes/C3/C3None Infectious Diseases
Society of America
and HIV Medical
Association –
Member of
Working Group at
the Intersection of
OUD and
Infectious Disease
EpidemicsNational Center for
Advancing
Translational
SciencesNational Institutes of
Health –
Research GrantNone
Veterans
Administration
Healthcare
SystemNational Academy of
Sciences –
Appointed
Committee
Member of
Engineering and
Medicine Working
Group on
Evaluating
Community
Programs
Integrating
Infectious disease
and OUD
TreatmentsVeterans
Administration
Cooperative
StudiesNational Institute on
Drug Abuse –
Research Grant
National Institute on
Alcohol Abuse
and Alcoholism –
Research Grant
George E. Woody, MD University of
Pennsylvania
Perelman School
of Medicine
Department of
Psychiatry -
ProfessorNone None None None Alkermes – Research
GrantDiagnosis of
Substance Use
Disorder/C3/C3
American Society of
Addiction
Medicine –
Research GrantPresence/Absence
of substance
use disorder or
other health
problem that
could impair
practice of
licensed
professional/C3/C3
National Institute on
Drug Abuse/C3/C3-
Clinical Trial on
improving
outcomes of
opioid addicted
prisoners with
extended release
injectable
naltrexone given
before or after
reentry
Tricia E. Wright, MD,
MS, FACOG,
DFASAMUniversity of
California San
Francisco –
Professor of
Clinical
MedicineCambridge
University
Press/C3American College of
Obstetrics and
Gynecology/C3None State of Hawaii None None
University Health
Partners,
University of
HawaiiAmerican Society of
Addiction
Medicine/C3/C15Adopted by the ASAM Board of Directors December 18, 2019 NPG for the Treatment of Opioid Use Disorder
/C2232020 American Society of Addiction Medicine 79
Copyright © 2020 American Society of Addiction Medicine. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.(Continued )
Guideline
Committee
Member Salary ConsultantSpeakers
BureauOwnership/
Partnership/
PrincipalInstitutional,
Organiza-
tional or
other finan-
cial benefit ResearchExpert
Witness
Stephen A. Wyatt, DO,
FAOAAM, FASAM
(Co-chair )Atrium Health –
Medical Director
of Addiction
MedicineNone None None None None None
The above table presents relationships of the Guideline Committee during the past 12 months with industry and other entities that were determined to be relevant to this document.
These relationships are current as of the completion of this document and may not necessarily reflect relationships at the time of this document’s pub lication. A relationship or
arrangement is considered to be significant if the individual receives compensation which includes cash, shares, and/or anything else of value including direct ownership of shares, stock,
stock options or other interest of 5% more of an entity or valued at $10,000 or more (excluding mutual funds), whichever is greater. A relationship or ar rangement is considered to be
modest if it is less than significant under the preceding definition. A relationship or arrangement is considered to be unpaid if the individual does not receive monetary reimbursement.
/C3/C3Indicates significant relationship./C3Indicates modest relationship.White et el. /C15Adopted by the ASAM Board of Directors December 18, 2019
80 /C2232020 American Society of Addiction Medicine
Copyright © 2020 American Society of Addiction Medicine. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.Appendix VI: 2019 ASAM Board of Directors Relationships with Industry and Other Entities
Board Member Salary Consultant Speakers BureauOwnership/
Partnership/
PrincipalInstitutional,
Organizational
or other finan-
cial benefit Research
Anthony P. Albanese,
MD, DFASAMVeterans Health
Administration -
Chief of
Hepatology, VA
Northern
California
Healthcare
SystemGilead Sciences Gilead Sciences Agape Family
Ministries -
Board of
Directors
MemberNone None
Veterans Health
Administration –
Affiliations
Officer, VA
Office of
Academic
AffiliationsAbbVie
PharmaceuticalsAbbVie
PharmaceuticalsCalifornia Impaired
Driving Taskforce
Anika Alvanzo, MD,
MS, FACP,
DFASAMJohns Hopkins
University School
of Medicine -
Faculty (95%)
Uzima Consulting
Group, LLC (5%)None None Uzima Consulting
Group, LLCNone None
Gavin Bart, MD,
PhD, FACP,
DFASAMHennepin Healthcare National Alliance for
Medication
Assisted
RecoveryNone None American College of
Academic
Addiction
MedicineNone
National Institutes of
Health – Federal
GrantsNational Institute on
Drug Abuse -
Investigator on
several grants
Substance Abuse and
Mental Health
Services
Administration –
Federal GrantsSubstance Abuse and
Mental Health
Services
Administration –
Director of
International
Technology
Transfer Grant
Gregory Boehm, MD,
DFASAMPrivate Practice -
Outpatient IOP
(90%)None None None None None
Salvation Army -
Child/Adolescent
Psychiatry (10%)
Psychiatric Patient
Care in Re-Entry
Program
Brent Boyett, DO,
DMD, DFASAMPathway Healthcare
(99%)Mississippi Board of
Medical DirectorsALANA Pathway Healthcare -
Chief Medical
Officer, Board of
Directors
MemberOutpatient Addiction
Recovery CentersNone
Mississippi Board of
Medical Directors
(no pay as of yet,
will be about
1%)Indivior
Kelly J. Clark, MD,
MBA, DFAPA,
DFASAMAddiction Crisis
SolutionsCouncil of State
GovernmentsNone CleanSlate Centers -
was Chief
Medical OfficerCleanSlate Centers -
Equity InterestNone
Dr Kelly Clark,
PLLC;Sandoz Addiction Crisis
Solutions -
FounderDisposeRX - Equity
Interest
DisposeRx DisposeRx - Director
Private Practice - Dr
Kelly Clark,
PLLC
Paul H. Earley, MD,
DFASAMEarley Consultancy,
LLC - PhysicianDynamiCare Health,
Inc.None Federation of State
Physician Health
Programs -
PresidentNone None
Georgia Professionals
Health program -
Medical Director
DynamiCare Health,
Inc. - Consultant/C15Adopted by the ASAM Board of Directors December 18, 2019 NPG for the Treatment of Opioid Use Disorder
/C2232020 American Society of Addiction Medicine 81
Copyright © 2020 American Society of Addiction Medicine. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.(Continued )
Board Member Salary Consultant Speakers BureauOwnership/
Partnership/
PrincipalInstitutional,
Organizational
or other finan-
cial benefit Research
Kenneth I. Freedman,
MD, MS, MBA,
FACP, AGAF,
DFASAMMA Department of
Public Health,
Lemuel Shattuck
HospitalSandoz - Advisory
Panel for reSETNone averHealth - Chief
Medical OfficerNone None
averHealth - Chief
Medical Officer
(15%)American Society of
Addiction
Medicine –
Corporate Round
Table Member
Boston Medical
Library – Trustee
and Finance
Committee
Member
Joseph Garbely, DO,
DFASAMCaron Treatment
Centers - Vice
President of
Medical Services,
Medical Director
(95%)None None Caron Treatment
Centers - Vice
President of
Medical Services,
Medical DirectorPenn State College of
Medicine -
Clinical
Associate
Professor of
PsychiatryNone
Collaborative
Neuropsychiatric
Services, LLC -
Addiction
Psychiatrist (5%)Reading Hospital
Addiction
Medicine
Fellowship
Program -
Program DirectorStony Brook College
of Medicine -
Clinical Adjunct
Associate
Professor of
Family Medicine
Murtuza Ghadiali,
MD, FASAMThe Permanente
Medical Group
(100%)None None Bay Area Physicians
for Human Rights
- PresidentNone None
Alliance Health
Project of UCSF
- Advisory Board
Member
Adam J. Gordon, MD,
MPH, FACP,
DFASAMDepartment of
Veterans Affairs
(75%)None None None AMERSA Journal of
Substance Abuse
- Editor in ChiefNone
University of Utah
School of
Medicine (25%)National Institutes of
Health – Grant
Reviews
National Institutes of
Health – Grant
Reviews ( <1%)
Charitable
Organizations,
e.g. ASAM,
AMERSA -
Activity
Participation
(<1%)
William F. Haning,
III, MD, DFAPA,
DFASAMUniversity of Hawaii
School of
Medicine -
Emeritus
Professor,
Department of
Psychiatry
Retirement
Pension (40%)None None American Board of
Psychiatry and
Neurology -
Addiction
Psychiatry
Examination
Committee ChairAmerican Medical
Response –
Physician
(Spouse)None
University of Health
Partners -
Director of
Addiction
Training
Programs (20%)Pacific Health
Research and
Education
Institute - Board
of Directors
MemberFire Departments of
Honolulu, Kauai,
and Maui
Counties
U.S. Navy -
Retirement
Pension (20%)Department of Water
Safety, Honolulu
Social Security
Benefits (20%)Emergency
Department of
the Queen’s
Medical Center
Randolph P. Holmes,
MD, FASAMPrivate Practice
Medical Group
(90%)None None None None None
Residency Faculty
(5%)White et el. /C15Adopted by the ASAM Board of Directors December 18, 2019
82 /C2232020 American Society of Addiction Medicine
Copyright © 2020 American Society of Addiction Medicine. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.(Continued )
Board Member Salary Consultant Speakers BureauOwnership/
Partnership/
PrincipalInstitutional,
Organizational
or other finan-
cial benefit Research
Treatment Program
Medical Director
(5%)
Brian Hurley, MD,
MBA, DFASAMLos Angeles County
Department of
Mental Health -
Clinical and
Administrative
Work (66%)Valera Health (2016) PsyBAR Annenberg Physician
Training Program
in Addictive
Disease -
Financial OfficerNone University of
California -
Smoking
Cessation Grant -
Primary
Investigator
Private Practice -
Clinical Work
(13%)American Academy
of Addiction
Psychiatry State
Targeted
Response
Technical
Assistance
Consortium
PsyBAR Insurance
Reviews - Expert
Clinical Opinions
(7%)
Center for Care
Innovcations
Treating
Addiction in the
Primary Care
Safety Net
Program -
Training Work
(5%)
Cedar Sinai Health
System -
Psychiatrist (5%)
Friends Research
Institute - Senior
Scientist (4%)
Annenberg Physician
Training Program
in Addictive
Disease -
Associate
Director ( <1%)
Frank James, MD, JD,
FASAMUnited HealthCare None None None None None
Optum
Margaret A. E. Jarvis,
MD, DFASAMGeisinger - Chief of
Addiction
Medicine (90%)Addiction Solutions Geisinger American Board of
Preventive
Medicine -
Addiction
Medicine Exam
Committee
MemberNone None
Addiction Solutions -
Consultant (10%)
Miriam Komaromy,
MD, FACP,
DFASAMUniversity of New
Mexico Health
Sciences CenterLawfirm of Baron and
BuddRubicon, MD Albuquerque Insight
Meditation
Society – Board
of Directors
MemberNone None
American Medical
Association
Alliance for Health
Policy
Marla D. Kushner,
DO, FSAHM,
FACOFP,
DFASAMPrivate Practice;
Insight
Behavioral
Health -
ConsultantInsight Behavioral
HealthAlkermes American Osteopathic
Academy of
Addiction
Medicine - Board
of Directors
MemberNone None
New Hope Recovery
CenterDane Street New Hope Recovery
Center - Medical
Director
Mercy Hospital -
Part-Time
EmployeeInsight Behavioral
Health ARCH
Program -
Medical Director
Advocate Physician’s
Group HMO/C15Adopted by the ASAM Board of Directors December 18, 2019 NPG for the Treatment of Opioid Use Disorder
/C2232020 American Society of Addiction Medicine 83
Copyright © 2020 American Society of Addiction Medicine. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.(Continued )
Board Member Salary Consultant Speakers BureauOwnership/
Partnership/
PrincipalInstitutional,
Organizational
or other finan-
cial benefit Research
Independent
Physicians of
Mercy HMO
Midwestern
University -
Teaching
Advocate Hope
Children’s
Hospital -
Teaching
Residents
Weiss Hospital -
Teaching
Residents
Caribbean Medical
University -
Teaching
Des Moines
University -
Teaching
Dane Street -
Consultant
Alkermes - Speaker
Ilse Levin, DO Mid Atlantic
Permanente
Medical GroupNone None None American Medical
Association
Liaison to the
National
Commission of
Correctional
Healthcare Board
of DirectorsNone
United States Navy –
Physician
(Spouse)
American Academy
of Family
Physicians –
Board of
Directors
(Spouse)
Kaiser - Shareholder
Penny S. Mills, MBA American Society of
Addiction
Medicine (100%)None None None None None
Yngvild K. Olsen,
MD, MPH,
DFASAMOutpatient Non-Profit
Specialty
Addiction
Treatment Center
(70%)Behavioral Health
AdministrationNone National Council on
Alcoholism and
Drug Dependence
- Board of
Directors
MemberOxford University
Press - Co-
Author of Book
on Opioid
EpidemicNone
Maryland’s
Behavioral
Health
Administration -
Medical
Consultant (25%)
PCSS - ASAM
Clinical Expert
(<5%)
Ken Roy, MD,
DLFAPA,
DFASAMCMO of Addiction
Recovery
Resources -
EmployeeNone US World Meds,
LucymeraAddiction Recovery
Resources
Treatment
Program - Chief
Medical OfficerNone None
Legal Consultations Alkermes, Vivitrol US World Meds -
Advisory Board
Member
Consultation and
Speaker Efforts
for PharmaAlkermes - Advisory
Board Member
Peter Selby, MBBS,
CCFP, FCFP,
MHSc, DFASAMCentre for Addiction
and Mental
Health - Chief of
Medicine in
Psychiatry
Division (20%)Johnson & Johnson -
E-NRT Advisory
BoardNone University of Toronto
Addiction
Medicine
Fellowship,
American Board
of Addiction
Medicine -
Program DirectorNone Pfizer Canada Inc.White et el. /C15Adopted by the ASAM Board of Directors December 18, 2019
84 /C2232020 American Society of Addiction Medicine
Copyright © 2020 American Society of Addiction Medicine. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.(Continued )
Board Member Salary Consultant Speakers BureauOwnership/
Partnership/
PrincipalInstitutional,
Organizational
or other finan-
cial benefit Research
University of Toronto
Department of
Family and
Community
Medicine -
Clinician
Scientist (20%)NVision Insight
GroupCentre for Addiction
and Mental
Health
Centre for Addiction
and Mental
Health
Addictions
Research
Program -
Clinician
Scientist (60%)Mylein & Associates Ontario Ministry of
Health and Long-
Term Care
Boehringer Ingelheim
(Spouse)Canadian Institutes of
Health Research
Canadian Centre on
Substance Use
and Addiction
Public Health Agency
of Canada
Medical Psychiatry
Alliance
Canadian Cancer
Society Research
Institute
Cancer Care Ontario
Ontario Institute for
Cancer Research
Bhasin Consulting
Fund Inc.
Patient-Centered
Outcomes
Research Institute
Jeffrey Selzer, MD,
DFASAMMedical Society of
the State of New
York - Medical
Director of the
Committee for
Physician Health
(80%)None None New York State
Psychiatric
Association -
Addiction
Psychiatry
Committee ChairNone None
Northwell Health -
Director of
Employee
Assistance
Program (20%)Medical Society of
the State of New
York - Addiction
and Behavioral
Health
Committee
Member
American Society of
Addiction
Medicine -
Secretary and
Public Policy
Committee Chair
Scott Teitelbaum,
MD, DFASAMUniversity of Florida
Health - Vice
Chair of
Department of
Psychiatry, Chief
of Addiction
MedicineNone None IBH Addiction
Recovery Center
– Board of
Directors
MemberNone None
Florida Recovery
Center - Medical
Director,
Fellowship
Director
Melissa Weimer, DO,
MCR, FASAMSt. Peters Health
Partners -
Employee (50%)Alkermes (2017) MCE Conference None InforMed - Author of
CME MaterialNone
Yale School of
Medicine -
Employee (50%)Indivior (2016)
US Department of
Justice -
Consultant (2%)American Association
of Addiction
Psychiatry/C15Adopted by the ASAM Board of Directors December 18, 2019 NPG for the Treatment of Opioid Use Disorder
/C2232020 American Society of Addiction Medicine 85
Copyright © 2020 American Society of Addiction Medicine. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.(Continued )
Board Member Salary Consultant Speakers BureauOwnership/
Partnership/
PrincipalInstitutional,
Organizational
or other finan-
cial benefit Research
SCOPE of Pain -
Consultant
(0.5%)SCOPE of Pain
Timothy Wiegand,
MD, FACMT,
FAACT,
DFASAMURMC Faculty
Practice (71%)None None New York Society of
Addiction
Medicine -
President ElectNone None
Other Clinical
Practice - e.g.
Huther Doyle
Outpatient CD
(18%)American College of
Medical
Toxicology -
Board of
Directors
Member, Chair of
Addiction and
Practice
Committees;
Expert Witness (8%) Medical Toxicology
Foundation -
Finance Chair
Royalties/other - e.g.
Uptodate (3%)
Aleksandra Zgierska,
MD, PhD,
DFASAMUniversity of
WisconsinNone None None None Pfizer Inc. - Research
Grants awarded
to University of
Wisconsin -
Principal/Co-
Principal
Investigator
The above table presents relationships of the ASAM Board of Directors during the past 12 months with industry and other entities that were determined to be relevant to this
document. These relationships are current as of the completion of this document and may not necessarily reflect relationships at the time of this docu ment’s publication.White et el. /C15Adopted by the ASAM Board of Directors December 18, 2019
86 /C2232020 American Society of Addiction Medicine
Copyright © 2020 American Society of Addiction Medicine. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.Appendix VII: 2019 ASAM Quality Improvement Council (Oversight Committee) Relationships
with Industry and Other Entities
Quality Improve-
ment Council
Member Salary ConsultantSpeakers
BureauOwnership/
Partnership/
PrincipalInstitutional,
Organizational
or other
financial
benefit Research
John P. Femino,
MD, DFASAMFemino Consultancy
- CEODominion
Diagnostics/C3/C3None None None None
Kenneth I.
Freedman, MD,
MS, MBA,
FACP, AGAF,
DFASAMAetna/CVS Health
– Medical
Director, SE
TerritoryaverHealth/C3/C3None Massachusetts
Department of
Public Health/C3/C3None American Academy of
Addiction Psychiatry/C3
- Research Grant
Sandoz/C3/C3Substance Abuse and
Mental Health
Services
Administration/C3
- Research Grant
Pfizer/C3
Substance Abuse
and Mental
Health Services
Administration/C3
R. Jeffrey
Goldsmith, MD,
DLFAPA,
DFASAMSelf-Employed
Specialist in
Addiction
MedicineNone None None None None
Barbara Herbert,
MD, DFASAMColumn Health –
Senior PhysicianAdvocates for
Human
Potential/C3None None None None
Margaret M. Kotz,
DO, DFASAMEmerita Case
Western Reserve
University
Medical SchoolNone None None None None
Margaret A. Jarvis,
MD, DFASAMGeisinger Health
System
Department of
Psychiatry –
Chief of
Addiction
MedicineNone None Geisinger Health
System/C3/C3None None
P. Stephen Novack,
DOAvita Health System
– Addiction
ProviderNone None None None None
David R. Pating,
MD, FASAMSan Francisco
County -
EmployeeNone None National Quality
Forum Behavioral
Health Steering
CommitteeNone None
American Society of
Addiction Medicine
Quality Committee
Sandrine Pirard,
MD, PhD,
MPH, FAPA,
FASAMBeacon Health
Options – Vice
President,
Medical
DirectorNone None None None None
The above table presents relationships of the ASAM Quality Improvement Council during the past 12 months with industry and other entities that were determined to be relevant
to this document. These relationships are current as of the completion of this document and may not necessarily reflect relationships at the time of th is document’s publication. A
relationship or arrangement is considered to be significant if the individual receives compensation which includes cash, shares, and/or anything else of value including direct ownership
of shares, stock, stock options or other interest of 5% more of an entity or valued at $10,000 or more (excluding mutual funds), whichever is greater. A r elationship or arrangement is
considered to be modest if it is less than significant under the preceding definition. A relationship or arrangement is considered to be unpaid if the individual does not receive monetary
reimbursement./C3/C3Indicates significant relationship./C3Indicates modest relationship./C15Adopted by the ASAM Board of Directors December 18, 2019 NPG for the Treatment of Opioid Use Disorder
/C2232020 American Society of Addiction Medicine 87
Copyright © 2020 American Society of Addiction Medicine. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.Appendix VIII: External Reviewer Relationships with Industry and Other Entities (2019 Guideline
Development Process)
External
Reviewer Representation Salary ConsultantSpeakers
BureauOwnership/
Partnership/
PrincipalInstitutional,
Organizational or
other financial
benefit
Samantha Arsenault Shatterproof Shatterproof (100%) None None None None
Chris A. Bina, PharmD Federal Bureau of
Prisons (FBP)U.S. Government - Sr.
Deputy Assistant
Director, Health
Services DivisionNone None None None
Federal Bureau of Prisons
Nathaniel Counts Mental Health America
(MHA)Mental Health America
(100%)None None National Prevention
Science CoalitionLifeBridge Health –
Employee (Mother)
One Circle Foundation
Flawless Foundation
Health Care
Transformation
Task Force
Jon Fanburg, MD American Academy of
Pediatrics (AAP)
Section on
Adolescent Health
(SOAH)Maine Medical Center -
Staff Physician (95%)None None Section on Adolescent
Health for the
American
Academy of
Pediatrics –
Executive
Committee
MemberNone
Quality Counts - Health
Care Consulting (5%)
James Finch, MD,
DFASAMIndividual Reviewer Private Practice Addiction
Medicine (90%);
Educational/Training
Consultant: NC
Governor’s Institute on
Substance Abuse
(10%)None None James W Finch, MD,
PLLC – Private
Practice PhysicianPractice was clinical site
for Duke University
node of NIDA
Clinical Trials
Network
North Carolina Governor’s
Institute on Substance
Abuse - Educational/
Training Consultant
(10%)
Michael Fingerhood,
MD, FACP,
FASAMIndividual Reviewer Johns Hopkins University -
Employee (100%)None None None None
Kevin Fiscella, MD,
MPHNational Commission
on Correctional
Health Care
(NCCHC)University of Rochester
Medical School
(100%)American Society of
Addiction
Medicine - Drug
Court InitiativesNone New York State
Department of
Health -
Buprenorphine
Working Group
MemberNone
Katie Greene National Governors
Association (NGA)National Governors
Association (100%)None None National Governors
Association -
Program Director
NGA HealthNone
Henrick Harwood National Association of
State Alcohol and
Drug Abuse
Directors
(NASADAD)Retired; Consulting Foundation for Opioid
Response EffortsNone Institute for Research,
Education and
Training in
Addictions - Board
MemberNone
Steven M. Jenkusky,
MD, MA, FAPAMagellan Managed Care Organization
and Part-Time Hospital
PhysicianNone None None None
Magellan Healthcare
Presbyterian Healthcare
Services
Paul Katz, DO, FACA,
DFASAMIndividual Reviewer -
ASAM Maryland/
DC State Chapter
PresidentChesapeake Wellness
Center - CEONone None Chesapeake Wellness
Center - President
and CEONone
Eastern Shore Psychological
Services - Associate
Director of Addiction
ServicesCecil County Drug and
Alcohol
Commission -
Appointed Member
Mayors Council on
Drug and Alcohol
- MemberWhite et el. /C15Adopted by the ASAM Board of Directors December 18, 2019
88 /C2232020 American Society of Addiction Medicine
Copyright © 2020 American Society of Addiction Medicine. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.(Continued )
External
Reviewer Representation Salary ConsultantSpeakers
BureauOwnership/
Partnership/
PrincipalInstitutional,
Organizational or
other financial
benefit
Bobby P. Kearney, MD,
FASAMIndividual Reviewer -
ASAM Opioid
Treatment Program
(OTP) Interest
GroupPrivate Practice Opioid
Treatment ProgramNone None Addiction Recovery
Medical ServicesNone
Audrey M. Kern, MD,
FASAMIndividual Reviewer -
ASAM Northern
New England State
Chapter PresidentPear Therapeutics - Medical
Director (95%)None None SUD/OUD Pear
Therapeutics -
Medical DirectorNone
Sobriety Centers of New
Hampshire (5%)
Julie Kmiec, DO,
FASAMAmerican Osteopathic
Academy of
Addiction
Medicine
(AOAAM)University of Pittsburgh
Physicians - Clinical
Work (65%)None None None American Osteopathic
Academy of
Addiction Medicine;
Pennsylvania Society
of Addiction
Medicine
University of Pittsburgh -
Research and Teaching
(25%)
Consultation - Independent
Contractor (10%)
Michelle R. Lofwall,
MD, DFASAMIndividual Reviewer Braeburn - Consulting Fees
and Research FundingTitan - Study Design/
Research ProtocolNone None None
CVS Caremark -Consulting
Fees
Titan – Consulting Fees
Indivior – Consulting Fees
Douglas W. Martin,
MDAmerican Academy of
Family Physicians
(AAFP)None None None Interstate Postgraduate
Medical
Association -
Board of Directors
MemberNone
Iowa Academy of
Family Physicians
- Board of
Directors
American Academy of
Family Physicians
Opioid Advisory
Committee -
Member
Shannon C. Miller, MD,
DFAPA, DFASAMIndividual Reviewer U.S. Government/
Department of
Veterans Affairs (VA) -
Salaried Physician
(Clinical, Research,
Teaching,
Administrative)None Veterans
AdministrationPrivate Practice LLC -
Sole Proprietor
(clinical patient
care, consulting to
law firmsAmerican Society of
Addiction Medicine -
Senior Editor of
Principles of
Addiction Medicine
Local Medical S
chools
Andrey Ostrovsky, MD Individual Reviewer Solera Health (90%) MindRight None None None
Blue Cloud (3%) Boulder Care
Children’s National Medical
Center (7%)Pocket Naloxone
Karuna Health
Aira
CityBlock
Galileo
Sitka
BlueCloud
FindLocalTreatment.com
Nicolette
Solera
Care at Hand
Mark Pirner, MD, PhD US World Meds US World Meds (100%) None None None None
John A. Renner, Jr. MD American Academy of
Addiction
Psychiatry (AAAP)
and American
Psychiatric
Association (APA)Veterans Administration
(93%)None None AAAP - Board of
Directors MemberJohnson & Johnson -
Stock Holder/C15Adopted by the ASAM Board of Directors December 18, 2019 NPG for the Treatment of Opioid Use Disorder
/C2232020 American Society of Addiction Medicine 89
Copyright © 2020 American Society of Addiction Medicine. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.(Continued )
External
Reviewer Representation Salary ConsultantSpeakers
BureauOwnership/
Partnership/
PrincipalInstitutional,
Organizational or
other financial
benefit
Boston University
Psychiatric Associates
- Teaching (1%)Veterans Administration
Massachusetts General
Hospital - Consulting,
Teaching ( <1%)Boston University
School of
Medicine
AAAP/PCSS - Consulting,
Teaching (2%)Boston University
Medical Center
Massachusetts Psychiatric
Association - Teaching
(<1%)
APA & APA Publishing -
Teaching, Royalties
(2%)
Nick Reuter, MPH Indivior Indivior None None None None
Elizabeth Salisbury-
Afshar, MD, MPH,
FAAFP, FACPM,
DFASAMAmerican College of
Preventive
Medicine (ACPM)American Institutes of
Research - Director of
the Center for
Addiction Research
and Effective Solutions
(85%)None American Academy
of Family
Physicians FMXHealth and Medicine
Policy Research
Group – Board of
Directors MemberAmerican Academy of
Addiction Psychiatry
- STR-TA
%); Heartland Alliance
Health - Part-Time
Physician (15%)Midwest Opioid
SummitAmerican College of
Preventive
Medicine -
Conference
Planning
Committee
MemberProviders Clinical Support
System - Provide
Buprenorphine
Waiver Trainings
American Family Physician
Journal - Co-Editor
(<.05%)Illinois Academy of
Family Physicians
- Board of
Directors Member
(ended in 2018)
Illinois Society of
Addiction
Medicine -
Treasurer
National Institute on
Alcohol Abuse and
Alcoholism
National Academy of
Medicine –
Member of Opioid
Work Group on
Prevention,
Treatment and
Recovery
Andrew J. Saxon, MD,
FASAMIndividual Reviewer Department of Veterans
Affairs - Staff
Psychiatrist (70%)Alkermes, Inc. None Alkermes, Inc. -
Advisory Board
MemberAmerican Academy of
Addiction Psychiatry
University of Washington -
Faculty Member (15%)American Psychiatric
Association
UpToDate - Section Editor
(7%)Up-To-Date - Editor
Forensic Work (8%)
Kenneth Stroller, MD American Association
for the Treatment
of Opioid
Dependence
(AATOD)Johns Hopkins Medicine
Academic Medical
Center (90–95%)None AATOD AATOD – Board of
Directors MemberNone
Medical Consulting -
Mostly Forensic (5–
10%)Johns Hopkins
MedicineThe Joint Commission
National
Behavioral Health
Council
SAMHSA Center for
Substance Abused
Treatment’s
National Advisory
CouncilWhite et el. /C15Adopted by the ASAM Board of Directors December 18, 2019
90 /C2232020 American Society of Addiction Medicine
Copyright © 2020 American Society of Addiction Medicine. Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited.(Continued )
External
Reviewer Representation Salary ConsultantSpeakers
BureauOwnership/
Partnership/
PrincipalInstitutional,
Organizational or
other financial
benefit
Bruce G. Trigg, MD Individual Reviewer Consultant work including
mentoring and
buprenorphine trainings
for the NY State
Department of Health,
NY City Department
of Health, Montana
Department of Health
(100%)None None None None
Marvin Ventrell National Association of
Addiction
Treatment
Providers (NAATP)NAATP None None NAATP None
Corey Waller, MD, MS,
DFASAM, FACEPIndividual Reviewer Health Management
AssociatesNone None None None
Locums Emergency
Department Work
Alysse G. Wurcel, MD,
MSInfectious Diseases
Society of America
(IDSA)None None None None None
The above table presents relationships of the external reviewers during the past 12 months with industry and other entities that were determined to be relevant to this document.
These relationships are current as of the completion of this document and may not necessarily reflect relationships at the time of this document’s pub lication./C15Adopted by the ASAM Board of Directors December 18, 2019 NPG for the Treatment of Opioid Use Disorder
/C2232020 American Society of Addiction Medicine 91
