Original Article
Dutch national survey to test the STRONG kidsnutritional risk screening tool in
hospitalized childrenq
Jessie M. Hulsta,*, Henrike Zwarta, Wim C. Hopb, Koen F.M. Joostena
aErasmus MC, Department of Pediatrics, Sophia’s Children Hospital, Rotterdam, The Netherlands
bErasmus MC, Department of Biostatistics, Rotterdam, The Netherlands
article info
Article history:
Received 4 February 2009Accepted 21 July 2009
Keywords:
MalnutritionRisk group
Screening tool
Hospitalized childrenNational studysummary
Background & aims: Children admitted to the hospital are at risk of developing malnutrition. The aim of
the present study was to investigate the feasibility and value of a new nutritional risk screening tool,
called STRONG kids, in a nationwide study.
Methods: A Prospective observational multi-centre study was performed in 44 Dutch hospitals
(7 academic and 37 general), over three consecutive days during the month of November 2007.TheSTRONG
kidsscreening tool consisted of 4 items: (1) subjective clinical assessment, (2) high risk disease,
(3) nutritional intake, (4) weight loss. Measurements of weight and length were performed. SD-scores</C02 for weight-for-height and height-for-age were considered to indicate acute and chronic malnutri-
tion respectively.
Results: A total of 424 children were included. Median age was 3.5 years and median hospital stay was 2
days. Sixty-two percent of the children were classiﬁed ‘‘at risk’’ of developing malnutrition by the
STRONG
kidstool. Children at risk had signiﬁcantly lower SD-scores for weight-for-height, a higher
prevalence of acute malnutrition and a longer hospital stay compared to children with no nutritional risk.
Conclusions: The nutritional risk screening tool STRONG kidswas successfully applied to 98% of the chil-
dren. Using this tool, a signiﬁcant relationship was found between having a ‘‘high risk’’ score, a negative
SD-score in weight-for-height and a prolonged hospital stay.
/C2112009 Elsevier Ltd and European Society for Clinical Nutrition and Metabolism. All rights reserved.
1. Introduction
Children who are admitted to the hospital are at a high risk of
developing malnutrition, especially children with an underlying
disease.1,2High percentages of both acute and chronic malnutrition
have been reported in different countries.1
In a tertiary hospital in France, Sermet-Gaudelus et al. (2000)
found 62% of children had lost weight during their hospital stay.3It
is widely known that poor nutritional status has negative conse-
quences for the child, underlining the importance to careful
monitor. In two recent studies it was shown that both acute and
chronic malnutrition affect the cognitive development of school-aged children.4,5Furthermore, poor weight gain in children with
congenital heart defects, in the ﬁrst months after surgery, was
strongly related to later mortality.6
To prevent malnutrition, and especially hospital-acquired
malnutrition along with its complications, early identiﬁcation of
nutritional depletion is essential, ideally on admission to the
hospital. Such an approach provides the physician with the
opportunity to apply appropriate nutritional interventions, in the
hope of preventing complications. Currently, there is no consensus
to the best method of assessing nutritional risk of children
admitted to the hospital.
Three groups have attempted to develop such a nutritional risk
screening tool for children. Sermet-Gaudelus et al.3developed the
‘pediatric nutritional risk score’ and Secker and Jeejeebhoy7the
‘subjective global nutritional assessment’ (SGNA) tool. Both these
tools identify children at risk of malnutrition during hospitaliza-
tion. However, we have found these tools to be complicated and
time-consuming and consequently their uptake has been limited.
Recently, McCarthy et al.8developed the ‘STAMP’ tool, a combina-
tion of measurements of weight and height and two additionalquestions on disease risk and intake. We found this tool alsoNon-standard abbreviations: SD scores, standard deviation scores; WFH, weight-
for-height; HFA, height-for-age; STRONG kids, Screening Tool Risk on Nutritional
status and Growth.
qConference presentation: Conference of Dutch Society of Pediatrics, Veldhoven,
The Netherlands, November 6th 2008.
*Corresponding author at. Department of Pediatrics, Room Sp 3462, Dr. Mole-
waterplein 60, 3015 GJ Rotterdam, The Netherlands. Tel.: þ31 107040704; fax: þ31
107036811.
E-mail address: j.hulst@erasmusmc.nl (J.M. Hulst).
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
Clinical Nutrition
journal homepage: http://www .elsevier.com/locate/clnu
0261-5614/$ – see front matter /C2112009 Elsevier Ltd and European Society for Clinical Nutrition and Metabolism. All rights reserved.
doi:10.1016/j.clnu.2009.07.006Clinical Nutrition 29 (2010) 106–111
complex to use and more of a nutritional assessment than a nutri-
tional risk tool. There are no reports published using either of these
scoring systems. We therefore attempted to develop an easy to
apply nutritional risk screening tool, called STRONG kids, in an effort
to overcome some of the issues with previous tools. Our toolconsists of four areas (1) subjective global assessment (2) high risk
disease (3) nutritional intake and losses (4) weight loss or poor
weight increase. The aim of our study was to investigate the
feasibility and value of this new nutritional risk screening tool on
children admitted to hospitals in the Netherlands over three
consecutive days.
2. Materials and methods2.1. Subjects
Every Dutch hospital ( n¼101) containing a pediatric ward was
invited to participate (by letter), on a voluntary basis. This included
93 general and 8 academic hospitals. Our three screening days took
place from November 26th through November 28th 2007. Our
inclusion criteria were, age >1 month, admission to a pediatric ward
(intensive are patients excluded) and an expected stay of at least
one day. The institutional review board of Erasmus Medical Centre
approved the study protocol, and waived the need for informed
consent from each parent, because of the standard nature of the
measurements in this protocol. Parents or caregivers were
informed by a letter approved by the institutional review board and
could refrain from participation without consequences.
All children had their age, sex, diagnosis and length of hospital
stay recorded. Race was classiﬁed as Caucasian or non-Caucasian.
Children were classiﬁed as surgical or non-surgical, and suffering
from an underlying disease or not. The reasons for admission were
classiﬁed as respiratory, trauma, infectious, surgical, oncological,
gastro-intestinal, cardiac, neurological and others.
2.2. Assessment of nutritional status and nutritional risk factors
The research protocol consisted of the following items.
2.2.1. Item A: nutritional risk screening tool STRONG
kids(Screening
Tool for Risk on Nutritional status and Growth)
On admission a questionnaire to score the risk for malnutrition
was performed. This nutritional risk screening questionnaire con-
sisted of 4 items and each item was allocated a score of 1–2 points
with a maximum total score of 5 points;
(1) Subjective clinical assessment (1 point).
Is the patient in a poor nutritional status judged by subjectiveclinical assessment (diminished subcutaneous fat and/or
muscle mass and/or hollow face)?
(2) High risk disease (2 points).
Is there an underlying illness with a risk of malnutrition or
expected major surgery (Table 1 )?
(3) Nutritional intake and losses (1 point).
Are one of the following items present?
Excessive diarrhoea (/C21 5 per day) and/or vomiting ( >3 times/
day) the last few days?
Reduced food intake during the last few days before admis-
sion (not including fasting for an elective procedure or
surgery)?
Pre-existing dietetically advised nutritional intervention?
Inability to consume adequate intake because of pain?
(4) Weight loss or poor weight gain? (1 point)
Is there weight loss or no weight gain (infants <1 year)
during the last few weeks/months?The ﬁrst 2 items were assessed by a pediatrician and thesecond 2 items were discussed with the parents or care-
givers. Questions answered with ‘unclear’ were classiﬁed as
‘no’.
2.2.2. Item B: Anthropometric measurements
On admission, and also at discharge, weight measurements
were taken. Supine length or standing height was assessed on
admission only. All measurements were carried out in a standard-
ized way, using standard equipment (digital scales, stadiometer)
which was explained to the participating hospitals beforehand.
9
The measurements were performed by the nursing staff orattending physicians. All anthropometric data was compared with
published standards based on a Dutch reference population and
translated into standard deviation scores (SD scores).
10This resul-
ted in SD scores for weight-for-height (WFH) and height-for-age(HFA). A SD score of </C02 for WFH was used to indicate acute
malnutrition, and an SD score of </C02 for HFA was used to indicate
chronic malnutrition.
11Overall malnutrition rate was deﬁned as the
presence of acute and/or chronic malnutrition.
2.2.3. Statistical analysis
Descriptive analyses were used to describe the study population
and the feasibility of performing the risk assessment and the
measurements. Chi2-tests were used to compare percentages
between groups. Comparison of continuous data between groupswas carried out using the T-test, Mann–Whitney test or Kruskall
Wallis test.
The malnutrition risk score (scale 0–5) was compared with the
actual nutritional status on admission expressed as WFH SD-score.
Multiple regression analysis of various clinical measures such as
the length of stay (LOS) was carried out. LOS was converted loga-rithmically in this analysis to reduce the inﬂuence of outlying
observations. We considered p(two-sided) <0.05 to be signiﬁcant.
3. Results
The overall hospital response rate was 52% (52 hospitals, 7
academic and 45 general). Of this four of the 45 general hospitals
did not include any patients and 4 failed to return their case record
forms. Finally 44 hospitals participated (7 academic and 37
general). A total of 424 children met the inclusion criteria (172 from
Table 1
Overview of the item ‘high risk disease’ of the screening tool.
High risk disease
Anorexia nervosa
BurnsBronchopulmonary dysplasia (maximum age 2 years)
Celiac disease
Cystic ﬁbrosisDysmaturity/prematurity (corrected age 6 months)Cardiac disease, chronicInfectious disease (AIDS)Inﬂammatory bowel diseaseCancerLiver disease, chronic
Kidney disease, chronic
PancreatitisShort bowel syndromeMuscle diseaseMetabolic diseaseTraumaMental handicap/retardationExpected major surgery
Not speciﬁed (classiﬁed by doctor)J.M. Hulst et al. / Clinical Nutrition 29 (2010) 106–111 107
the academic and 252 from the general hospitals). Baseline char-
acteristics are shown in Table 2 . The median age was 3.5 years
(range 31 days–17.7 years) and the median length of hospital staywas 2 days (range 1–44 days). Twenty-four percent of the children
were admitted for >4 days. Surgery was the reason for admission
for 23% of the children. Overall 29% of the admitted childrensuffered from an underlying disease with a signiﬁcant difference
between the academic and general hospital population (51% vs. 15%
respectively, p<0.001).
3.1. Anthropometric measurements
Weight and height measurements on admission were available
in 99% and 92% of children respectively (height measurements
were not available in 8% of the children because of logistic reasons,
i.e. they were too sick to measure or had severe psychomotor or
neuromuscular disorders). The mean SD-score for WFH ( /C00.22 SD)
and HFA ( /C00.15 SD) was signiﬁcantly below zero (p ¼0.04 and
p¼0.035, respectively). The percentage of children with acute
malnutrition was 11% (95% CI: 8–15%) and with chronic malnutri-tion was 9% (95% CI: 6–12%). Overall the prevalence of malnutrition
on admission was 19% (95% CI: 15–23%).
3.2. Nutritional risk screening tool STRONG
kids
The nutritional risk screening tool STRONG kidswas used to
assess risk in 98% of the children. The four items of the question-
naire, i.e. ‘subjective clinical assessment’, ‘high risk disease’,
‘nutritional losses’ and ‘weight loss or poor weight gain’ scored
with presence ‘‘yes’’ in 10%, 28%, 48% and 15% respectively. In the
group of children in which the ‘subjective clinical assessment’ item
was scored positively, 49% were found to have a SD-score </C02 for
WFH of HFA. There was a signiﬁcant difference in scoring betweenacademic and general hospitals for ‘high risk disease’ (46% and 15%
respectively, p<0.001) and ‘nutritional losses’ (36% and 57%
respectively, p<0.001).
3.3. Malnutrition risk score
Fig. 1 depicts that when the risk scores increase the WFH SD-
scores decrease. It shows that risk scores from 1 to 3 have similarmean SD-scores for WFH (difference p¼0.84). These scores were
therefore combined under the category moderate risk . Furthermore,
the risk scores 4 and 5 have comparable mean SD-scores for WFH(difference p¼0.60), so these scores were combined under the
category high risk . Mean SD-scores are signiﬁcantly different
between risk categories.
3.4. Risk categories
Overall, 38% of the children were categorized as low risk, 54% as
moderate risk and 8% as high risk. The distribution of risk categories
between academic and general hospitals were signiﬁcantly
different, i.e. in the academic hospitals 15% of the children were
classiﬁed as high risk whereas this was only 5% in the general
hospitals ( p¼0.014 for low vs. high risk and p<0.001 for moderate
vs. high risk).
Differences in several characteristics and outcome variables
between the different risk categories are shown in Table 3 . There
was an increase in the percentage of children with acute malnu-
trition on admission from the low risk, to moderate risk and to high
risk groups, 5%, 14% and 27% respectively (p ¼0.004 for low vs.
Table 2
Patient characteristics and diagnoses (n¼424) according to type of hospital.
Patient characteristics Total n¼424 Academic n¼172 General n¼252
Sex, m:v (%) 63:37 62:38 64:36
Age (yr), Median (range) 3.5 (31 d–
17.7 years)5.7a(39 d–17.7 years) 2.2 (31 d–
17.6 years)
Length of hospital
stay (days), Median (range)2 (1–44) 2 (1–33) 2 (1–44)
Underlying disease (%) 29 51b15
Diagnostic groups (%)Infectious 32 9 47Surgical 23 37 13Gastro-intestinal 16 17 15Respiratory 6 5 7
Cardiac 4 9 1
Trauma 4 1 6Oncologic 4 9 0Neurological 3 5 2Other 8 8 9
asigniﬁcant difference compared to general hospitals ( p¼0.001).
bsigniﬁcant difference compared to general hospitals ( p<0.001).15 15 42 59 103 148 N =
Risk score5 4 3 2 1 0H F W  S D S.5
0.0
-.5
-1.0
-1.5
-2.0
Fig. 1. Relationship between nutritional risk scores (STRONG kids) and mean SD-scores
for WFH. All values expressed as mean /C6SEM. SDS WFH ¼SD-score for weight-for-
height. With increasing risk scores the SD-scores for WFH decreased (r s¼/C00.25,
p<0.001). Risk scores 1 through 3 have similar mean WFH SD-scores (difference
p¼0.84) and were combined into the category moderate risk . Risk scores 4 and 5 have
comparable mean WFH SD-scores (difference p¼0.60) and were combined into the
category high risk . Mean SD-scores are signiﬁcantly different among the 3 risk cate-
gories (p <0.05 for all comparisons).
Table 3
Differences between risk groups.
Low risk
(n¼160)Moderate risk(n¼223)High risk(n¼34)
SD weight-for-height (mean)
a,b,c0.21 /C00.40 /C01.15
SD height-for-age (mean)b,c/C00.11 /C00.04 /C01.05
Acute malnutritiona,b5% 14% 27%
Chronic malnutritionb,c8% 6% 28%
Malnutritionb,c12% 19% 47%
Academicb,c44% 35% 68%
Underlying diseasea,b,c5% 36% 97%
Surgicala,b43% 12% 3%
Age (median, years)a,c4.3 2.3 8.7
Length of stay (median, days)a,b2 (2.5)d3 (4.6)d3 (6.0)d
aSigniﬁcant difference between low risk and moderate risk group.
bSigniﬁcant difference between low risk and high risk group.
cSigniﬁcant difference between moderate risk and high risk group.
dMean length of stay is shown between parentheses.J.M. Hulst et al. / Clinical Nutrition 29 (2010) 106–111 108
moderate risk, p<0.001 for low vs. high risk, and p¼0.1 for
moderate vs. high risk). Furthermore, the prevalence of overall
malnutrition in the high risk group (47%) was signiﬁcantly higher
when compared to the percentage of malnutrition in the moderate
(19%) and low (12%) risk groups (both p<0.001).
The percentage of children with underlying disease was signif-
icantly different among the 3 risk categories (5%, 36% and 97% of the
children in the low, moderate and high risk groups respectively). In
95% of the children who scored ‘‘yes’’ for the item ‘high risk disease’
an underlying disease was present. The gender distribution was
similar in the 3 risk groups.
3.5. Length of hospital stay
The length of hospital stay (LOS) of children with a low risk score
was signiﬁcantly shorter compared to children with a moderate or
high risk score, median 2 vs. 3 days respectively ( p<0.001).
Univariate analysis revealed that an increase in the nutritional riskcategory, younger age, presence of an underlying disease, non-
surgical reason of admission and non-Caucasian ethnicity were all
signiﬁcantly related to a longer LOS. After adjusting for all theseclinical risk factors, multivariate analysis demonstrated that the
difference in LOS between nutritional lower vs. higher risk cate-
gories remained signiﬁcant ( p¼0.017).
3.6. Discharge data
Of the 103 children who were admitted to hospital for >4 days
the median length of stay was 8 days (range 5–44). Data for bothweight and height at discharge were available for 62 of the 103
children (60%). Within this group 65% of the children lost no weight
or gained weight, and 35% lost weight. Only 3% had a weight loss
more than 5% during this admission. Children in the high risk group
had a signiﬁcantly greater increase in WFH SD-score between
admission and discharge compared with the moderate and low risk
groups ( þ0.36 SD, þ0.00 SD, and þ0.004 SD respectively,
p<0.001).
4. Discussion
This is the ﬁrst study in which a nutritional risk screening tool,
called STRONG
kids, was used in a nationwide setting. The
STRONG kidstool is a comprehensive summary of commonly asked
questions concerning nutritional issues, combined with a clinical
view of the child’s status. It is performed on admission to the
hospital and it will help to raise the clinician’s awareness of
nutritional risks. In this study almost half of all Dutch hospitals
(both academic and general) participated and the STRONG kidswas
used in 98% of the children admitted to these hospitals. The prev-alence of malnutrition based on the weight and length measure-
ments was 19%, whilst STRONG
kids predicted that 54% of the
children were at moderate risk and 8% were at high risk of devel-oping malnutrition. Children at moderate or high nutritional risk
had signiﬁcantly lower SD scores for weight-for-height, a higher
prevalence of acute malnutrition (WFH </C02 SD) and a longer
hospital stay compared to children with low nutritional risk.
Compared with previously described nutritional risk screening
methods such as Sermet-Gaudelus et al. (France) and Secker and
Jeejeebhoy (Canada), it appears that STRONG
kidsis more practical
and simple.3,7We feel that its simplicity and practicality have been
demonstrated in that it can be carried out directly on admission,
can be carried out by one assessor and the nutritional risk is
immediately determinable. This makes the tool less time
consuming. Contrarily the tool of Sermet-Gaudelus et al. requires
a period of 48 h after admission in order to complete the nutritionalrisk score. This time is needed because nutritional intake is recor-
ded during the ﬁrst 48 h after admission. The subjective global
nutritional assessment in the study of Secker and Jeejeebhoy is also
rather complex because a number of additional questions con-
cerning the history of the child have to be completed. Although
both of these methods have advantages it is well known that
a time-consuming screening tool is less likely to be taken up by
health care providers. Furthermore with these methods skilled staff
was necessary whereas for STRONG kidswritten instructions alone
enabled the participating paediatricians to complete the ques-tionnaires appropriately in 98% of the cases.
Using both previously described screening tools three risk
groups were deﬁned and outcome parameters correlated with the
risk classiﬁcation. In the ﬁrst study
3a higher risk was associated
with more weight loss during admission whereas in the secondstudy
7a higher risk score was related to a longer hospital stay and
a higher infection rate. With the recently described STAMP tool,(which combines 2 questions along with weight and height
measurements) three risk groups were also deﬁned but so far these
have not been related to outcome parameters.
8Furthermore the
use of weight and height measurements is suggestive of an
assessment rather than a nutritional risk screening tool.
In our study, we were able to classify three risk groups from the
overall risk score based on anthropometric differences. We
showed that children in the moderate and high risk groups had
signiﬁcantly lower median SD-scores for WFH on admission. The
differences we found in SD-scores for WFH between the risk
groups were comparable with those found in the study of Secker
and Jeejeebhoy.
In contrast to the French study,3we observed no relationship
between risk score and weight loss during hospital admission. In
our group of children with a length of stay of >4 days, those with
the highest risk score showed the greatest weight gain. Overall inonly 3% of the children a weight loss >5% was measured during
admission. An explanation for this difference might be the fact thatin our study only a quarter of the children were admitted for >4
days whereas in the study of Sermet-Gaudelus et al. all patientswere followed. Furthermore, the children in the French study
stayed longer in the hospital and were of a younger age.
In our study nearly all children in the highest risk group had an
underlying disease. Most of the children with an underlying
disease were admitted to an academic hospital, which explains
the higher percentage of children with a high nutritional risk in
these hospitals compared to the general hospitals. Previous
studies have also demonstrated a high prevalence of malnutrition
in children with an underlying disease.
2,12–15This suggests that for
this speciﬁc group of children extra attention should always begiven to their nutritional status on admission and interventions
should be planned.
We feel that the strength of this study relates to a couple of
facts; 1. is that we were able to perform a nationwide study, per-
formed on a voluntary basis; 2. this screening tool STRONG
kidswas
successfully carried out in 98% of the children included; and 3. thatboth academic and general hospitals participated, thus indicating
that a representative group of children was included.
A weakness of this study is the fact that the screening tool was
performed by many different observers, possibly inﬂuencing theresults. However we had provided the same written instruction to
all participating pediatricians on the screening tool prior. There was
also a debate about the value of the item ‘subjective clinical
assessment’. So far only one study in children compared clinical
examination with anthropometry.
16In this study, in a group of 44
children agreement was found between the anthropometry and thenutritional classiﬁcation [in 64% of the observations].
16Further-
more, in the study of Secker and Jeejeebhoy part of the screeningJ.M. Hulst et al. / Clinical Nutrition 29 (2010) 106–111 109
tool included a nutrition-related physical examination, looking at
speciﬁc signs of fat and muscle wasting, as well as edema. In our
study we did not include an objective assessment but all observa-
tions were carried out by skilled pediatricians which might give
more reliable results. We included the subjective clinical assess-
ment item because we felt that a nutritional risk screening tool
should contain an item that incorporates the clinical condition of
the child. Alternatively a measurement such as arm circumference
or skinfold thickness could be added to the tool. However this then
moves the tool from a risk assessment to a nutritional assessment,
which we feel is the next step after screening for risk. This is
a commonly confused aspect in practice where assessment is mixed
with risk, whilst the purpose of our study was to screen nutritional
risk only and not to assess the status of the child.
Another limitation of our study is the lack of measuring the
consistency of the items, i.e. the interrater variability. This should
be performed in future studies. Our study was not designed as
a validation study and therefore nothing can be concluded about
the sensitivity or speciﬁcity of the STRONG kidstool. We believe,
however, that the question remains as to what method should beused to validate a nutritional risk screening tool. Future studiesshould consider length of hospital stay and items concerning
morbidity (i.e. complication rate, secondary infections, antibiotic
use and time between hospital admission as well as time to
complete recovery at home) as outcome parameters. These items
might be more reliable than weight loss during admission (as many
children do not lose weight) or nutritional status upon admission.
In order to thoroughly investigate these relationships a much larger
study population is needed. However, we would encourage the use
of STRONG
kidsas a practical awareness tool until further studies are
performed in this area.
In conclusion, we believe that the nutritional risk screening tool
STRONG kidswill help raise clinician’s awareness of the importance
of nutritional status in children. It directs the clinician to consider
important issues related to nutritional risk including the clinical
appearance of the child, the disease risk, nutritional losses, inade-
quate intake and weight trajectory. Furthermore, the use of this
screening tool can ensure early identiﬁcation of those children at
nutritional risk and therefore ensure nutritional interventions that
may contribute to overall improvements in our patients care.
Concerning the therapeutic consequences of the STRONG kids
screening tool, we propose a nutritional follow-up according to the
risk category, which is displayed in Table 4 . Children classiﬁed in
the ‘‘moderate risk’’ group should receive a critical look at theirnutritional intake and follow-up weight measurements are indi-
cated at least twice per week with a re-evaluation of their risk after
one week. For all children in the ‘‘high risk’’ category, a consultation
with a dietician is warranted immediately after admission in order
to make an adequate and individualized nutritional plan.Conﬂict of interest
No conﬂicts of Interests declared by all authors.
Statement of authorship
JH and KJ proposed the study, and participated in its design and
coordination as well as drafted the manuscript. HZ carried out the
studies and helped to analyze the data and helped to draft the
manuscript. WH performed the statistical analysis and interpreta-
tion of data together with JH and helped to draft the manuscript. All
authors read and approved the ﬁnal manuscript.
Acknowledgements
Our thanks goes to all the participating children and their
parents for their cooperation, as well to all the participating
hospitals, their contact persons and the nursing and medical staff
for performing the measurements and questionnaire and to the
seven students who were prepared to go to all academic hospitals
to assist the coordinating physicians and collect the forms. We alsothank Nutricia Nederland BV (Zoetermeer, the Netherlands) for
their ﬁnancial support. Nutricia played no role in the study design,
in the collection, analysis and interpretation of data, nor in the
writing of the manuscript and in the decision to submit the
manuscript for publication.
The participating hospitals and coordinating physicians were:
VU medical centre, Amsterdam – M van der Kuip and S van der
Schoor; Emma Children’s Hospital AMC, Amsterdam – C Jonkers
and A Kindermann; University Medical Centre Groningen, Beatrix
Children’s Hospital, Groningen – HA Koetse; Leiden University
Medical Centre, Leiden – J Schweizer; University Hospital Maas-
tricht, Maastricht – K Klucovska and E van Heurn; Wilhelmina
Children’s Hospital, University Medical Center Utrecht – G Visser;
Medical Centre Alkmaar, Alkmaar – EK George; Flevo hospital,
Almere – JM Deckers – Kocken; Meander Medical centre, Amers-
foort – R Nuboer and NL Ramakers – van Woerden; Slotervaart
Hospital, Amsterdam – JHM Budde; Gelre Hospital, Apeldoorn –
MH Ro ¨vekamp; Wilhelmina Hospital, Assen – Y Bult and G Gon-
era;, Amphia Hospital, Breda – SA de Man and R van Beek;IJsselland Hospital, Capelle a/d IJssel – HAA Damen, M Steijn and I
Onvlee; Reinier de Graaf Gasthuis, Delft – MW Hekkelaan –
Wesselink and JO Wishaupt; St. Gemini Hospital, Den Helder-SE
Barten;, Slingeland Hospital, Doetinchem – MWM Eling; Albert
Schweitzer Hospital, Dordrecht – ED de Kleijn; Catharina Hospital,
Eindhoven – T Hendriks; Oosterschelde Hospital, Goes – EJA
Gerritsen and L Gerling; Beatrix Hospital, Gorinchem – WAR
Huijbers and M Evera-Preesman; HAGA hospital, Juliana Child-
ren’s Hospital, The Hague – RH Lopes Cardozo; Hospital St. Jansdal,
Harderwijk – KJ Oosterhuis and J Hagendoorn; Hospital De Tjon-
gerschans, Heerenveen – SM van Dorth; Elkerliek Hospital, Hel-
mond – WEA Bolz and HGF Brouwer; Jeroen Bosch Hospital, ’s
Hertogenbosch – JH Hoekstra and E de Vries; Bethesda Hospital,
Hoogeveen – AJ Stege; Medical Centre Leeuwarden, Leeuwarden –
J Uitentuis; IJsselmeer Hospitals, Lelystad – WB Hofstra and H.
Vogt; Canisius – Wilhelmina Hospital, Nijmegen – BA Semmekrotand R Verlaak; Hospital Bernhoven, Oss – MJ Louwers; Maasland
Hospital, Sittard – AC Engelberts; Ruwaard van Putten Hospital,
Spijkenisse – D Birnie and M Vielvooye;, Zorgsaam Hospital de
Honte, Terneuzen – UI Fra ¨nkel;, Tweesteden Hospital, Tilburg – JW
Bonenkamp; Diakonessenhuis, Utrecht – WJ de Waal; MesosMedical Centre loc. Oudenrijn, Utrecht – HE Blokland-Loggers;
Hospital Bernhoven, Veghel – AE Sluiter and W vd Broek; St. Jans-
Gasthuis, Weert – EM Kerkvliet and C Oud; St. Lucas Hospital,
Winschoten – B Auffarth-Smedema; Lange Land Hospital,Table 4
Nutritional risk score and recommendations for nutritional intervention.
Score Risk for malnutrition and need for intervention
Risk Intervention and follow-up
4–5 Points High risk Consult doctor and dietician for full diagnosis
and individual nutritional advice and follow-up.
Start prescribing sip feeds until further diagnosis.
1–3 Points Medium risk Consult doctor for full diagnosis; consider nutritional
intervention with dietician.
Check weight twice a week and evaluate thenutritional risk after one week.
0 Points Low risk No intervention necessary.
Check weight regularly conform hospital policy andevaluate the nutritional risk after one week.J.M. Hulst et al. / Clinical Nutrition 29 (2010) 106–111 110
Zoetermeer – JCD Brevoord; Gelre Hospitals, Zutphen – HFH Thijs;
Princess Amalia Children’s Clinic, Isala Clinic, Zwolle – A Molen-
dijk and J Bekhof.
The participating students were N Kruijer, P Kramer, C Alingh, A
Kerver, S vd Oord, H Zwart, and W Roest.
References
1. Joosten KFM, Hulst JM. Prevalence of malnutrition in pediatric hospital patients.
Curr Opin Pediatr 2008; 20:590–6.
2. Pawellek I, Dokoupil K, Koletzko B. Prevalence of malnutrition in paediatric
hospital patients. Clin Nutr 2008; 27:72–6.
3. Sermet-Gaudelus I, Poisson-Salomon AS, Colomb V, Brusset MC, Mosser F,
Berrier F, et al. Simple pediatric nutritional risk score to identify children at risk
of malnutrition. Am J Clin Nutr 2000;72 :64–70.
4. Emond AM, Blair PS, Emmett PM, Drewett RF. Weight faltering in infancy and IQ
levels at 8 years in the Avon longitudinal study of parents and children. Pedi-
atrics 2007; 120:e1051–8.
5. Kar BR, Rao SL, Chandramouli BA. Cognitive development in children with
chronic protein energy malnutrition. Behav Brain Funct 2008; 4:31.
6. Eskedal LT, Hagemo PS, Seem E, Eskild A, Cvancarova M, Seiler S, et al. Impaired
weight gain predicts risk of late death after surgery for congenital heart defects.
Arch Dis Child 2008; 93:495–501.7. Secker DJ, Jeejeebhoy KN. Subjective global nutritional assessment for children.
Am J Clin Nutr 2007;85 :1083–9.
8. McCarthy H, McNulty H, Dixon M, Eaton-Evans MJ. Screening for nutrition risk
in children: the validation of a new tool. J Hum Nutr Diet 2008; 21:395–6.
9. Gerver W, De Bruin R. Paediatric morphometrics: a reference manual . Utrecht:
Bunge; 1996.
10. Fredriks AM, van Buuren S, Burgmeijer RJ, Meulmeester JF, Beuker RJ,
Brugman E, et al. Continuing positive secular growth change in The Netherlands1955–1997. Pediatr Res 2000;47 :316–23.
11. WHO. Management of severe malnutrition: a manual for physicians and other
senior health workers . Geneva: World Health Organization; 1999.
12. Cameron JW, Rosenthal A, Olson AD. Malnutrition in hospitalized children with
congenital heart disease. Arch Pediatr Adolesc Med 1995; 149:1098–102.
13. den Broeder E, Lippens RJ, van’t Hof MA, Tolboom JJ, Sengers RC, van
Staveren WA. Association between the change in nutritional status in responseto tube feeding and the occurrence of infections in children with a solid tumor.
Pediatr Hematol Oncol 2000;17 :567–75.
14. Hendricks KM, Duggan C, Gallagher L, Carlin AC, Richardson DS, Collier SB, et al.
Malnutrition in hospitalized pediatric patients. Current prevalence. Arch Pediatr
Adolesc Med 1995; 149:1118–22.
15. Sylvestre LC, Fonseca KP, Stinghen AE, Pereira AM, Meneses RP, Pecoits-Filho R.
The malnutrition and inﬂammation axis in pediatric patients with chronic
kidney disease. Pediatr Nephrol 2007; 22:864–73.
16. Cross JH, Holden C, MacDonald A, Peramain G, Stevens MC, Booth IW. Clinical
examination compared with anthropometry in evaluating nutritional status.Arch Dis Child 1995; 72:60–1.J.M. Hulst et al. / Clinical Nutrition 29 (2010) 106–111 111
