IDSA FEATURES
eIDSA 2019 Clinical Practice Guideline for the Management of Asymptomatic Bacteriuria • cid  2019:68 (15 May) • 83Clinical Infectious Diseases
 
Received 29 November 2018; editorial decision 20 December 2018; accepted 27 December 
2018; published online March 21, 2019.
aThe guidelines represent the proprietary and copyrighted property of the Infectious Diseases 
Society of America (IDSA). Copyright 2018 IDSA. All rights reserved. No part of these guide-
lines may be reproduced, distributed, or transmitted in any form or by any means, including 
photocopying, recording, or other electronic or mechanical methods, without the prior written 
permission of IDSA. Permission is granted to physicians and healthcare providers solely to copy 
and use the guidelines in their professional practices and clinical decision making. No license 
or permission is granted to any person or entity, and prior written authorization by IDSA is re-
quired, to sell, distribute, or modify the guidelines, or to make derivative works of or incorporate the guidelines into any product, including but not limited to clinical decision support software or 
any other software product. Any person or entity desiring to use the guidelines in any way must 
contact IDSA for approval in accordance with IDSA’s terms and conditions of third party-use, in 
particular, any use of the guidelines in any software product.
Correspondence: L. E. Nicolle, Department of Internal Medicine, GG-443 Health Sciences 
Centre 820 Sherbrook St, School of Medicine, Rady Faculty of Health Sciences, University of 
Manitoba, Winnipeg, MB, R3A 1R9, Canada ( Lindsay.Nicolle@umanitoba.ca).
Clinical Infectious Diseases
®  2019;68(10):e83–75
© The Author(s) 2019. Published by Oxford University Press for the Infectious Diseases Society 
of America. All rights reserved. For permissions, e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com.
DOI: 10.1093/cid/ciy1121Clinical Practice Guideline for the Management of 
Asymptomatic Bacteriuria: 2019 Update by the Infectious 
Diseases Society of Americaa
Lindsay E. Nicolle,1 Kalpana Gupta,2 Suzanne F. Bradley,3 Richard Colgan,4 Gregory P . DeMuri,5 Dimitri Drekonja,6 Linda O. Eckert,7 Suzanne E. Geerlings,8 
Béla Köves,9 Thomas M. Hooton,10 Manisha Juthani-Mehta,11 Shandra L. Knight,12 Sanjay Saint,13 Anthony J. Schaeffer,14 Barbara Trautner,15 Bjorn Wullt,16 
and Reed Siemieniuk17
1Department of Internal Medicine, School of Medicine, Rady Faculty of Health Sciences, University of Manitoba, Winnipeg, Canada; 2Division of Infectious Diseases, Veterans Affairs Boston 
Healthcare System and Boston University School of Medicine, West Roxbury, Massachusetts; 3Division of Infectious Diseases, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor; 4Department of Family and 
Community Medicine, University of Maryland, Baltimore; 5Division of Pediatric Infectious Diseases, Department of Pediatrics, University of Wisconsin School of Medicine and Public Health, 
Madison; 6Division of Infectious Diseases, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis; 7Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology and Department of Global Health, University of Washington, Seattle; 
8Department of Internal Medicine, Amsterdam University Medical Center, The Netherlands; 9Department of Urology, South Pest Teaching Hospital, Budapest, Hungary; 10Division of Infectious 
Diseases, University of Miami, Florida; 11Division of Infectious Diseases, Yale School of Medicine, New Haven, Connecticut; 12Library and Knowledge Services, National Jewish Health, Denver, 
Colorado; 13Department of Internal Medicine, Veterans Affairs Ann Arbor and University of Michigan, Ann Arbor; 14Department of Urology, Northwestern University, Chicago, Illinois; 15Section of 
Health Services Research, Department of Medicine, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, Texas; 16Division of Microbiology, Immunology and Glycobiology, Lund, Sweden; and 17Department of 
Health Research Methods, Evidence, and Impact, McMaster University, Hamilton, Ontario, Canada
Asymptomatic bacteriuria (ASB) is a common finding in many populations, including healthy women and persons with underlying 
urologic abnormalities. The 2005 guideline from the Infectious Diseases Society of America recommended that ASB should be screened for and treated only in pregnant women or in an individual prior to undergoing invasive urologic procedures. Treatment 
was not recommended for healthy women; older women or men; or persons with diabetes, indwelling catheters, or spinal cord injury. 
The guideline did not address children and some adult populations, including patients with neutropenia, solid organ transplants, and 
nonurologic surgery. In the years since the publication of the guideline, further information relevant to ASB has become available. In 
addition, antimicrobial treatment of ASB has been recognized as an important contributor to inappropriate antimicrobial use, which promotes emergence of antimicrobial resistance. The current guideline updates the recommendations of the 2005 guideline, includes new recommendations for populations not previously addressed, and, where relevant, addresses the interpretation of nonlocalizing clinical symptoms in populations with a high prevalence of ASB.
Keywords. asymptomatic bacteriuria; bacteriuria; urinary tract infection; pyelonephritis; cystitis; diabetes; pregnancy; renal 
transplant; endourologic surgery; urologic devices; urinary catheter; older adults; nursing home; long-term care; spinal cord injury; neurogenic bladder.
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
Asymptomatic bacteriuria (ASB) is the presence of 1 or more 
species of bacteria growing in the urine at specified quantitative 
counts (≥ 105 colony-forming units [CFU]/mL or ≥ 108 CFU/L), 
irrespective of the presence of pyuria, in the absence of signs or symptoms attributable to urinary tract infection (UTI). ASB is a common finding in some healthy female populations and in 
many women or men with abnormalities of the genitourinary tract that impair voiding. In 2005, the Infectious Diseases Society 
of America (IDSA) published a guideline with recommenda-
tions for the management of ASB in adults. The current guide-
line reviews and updates the 2005 guideline, incorporating new 
evidence that has become available. The recommendations also consider populations not addressed in the 2005 guidelines, such 
as children and patients with solid organ transplants or neutro-
penia. Since the previous guideline was published, antimicrobial 
stewardship programs have identified nontreatment of ASB as 
an important opportunity for decreasing inappropriate antimi-
crobial use. Nonlocalizing signs and symptoms are common in Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article/68/10/e83/5407612 by MUSC Library user on 12 November 2025

e84 • cid  2019:68 (15 May) • Nicolle et alindividuals in some populations with a high prevalence of ASB 
and may lead to clinical uncertainty in the diagnosis of symp-tomatic infection. This may compromise the implementation of nontreatment recommendations. Thus, this updated guide-line also addresses the clinical presentation of symptomatic UTI 
in populations where there is a high prevalence of ASB, such 
as patients with spinal cord injury or older adults (≥ 65 years). 
Candiduria is not addressed, as recommendations for man-agement of this syndrome were included in the recent update of the IDSA Clinical Practice Guidelines for the Management of Candidiasis. The panel followed a process used in the devel-opment of other IDSA guidelines, which included a system-atic weighting of the strength of recommendation and quality of evidence using Grading of Recommendations Assessment, Development and Evaluation (GRADE) (Figure 1) [1–5].
Summarized below are the 2019 revised recommenda-
tions for the management of ASB in adults and children. The guidelines are not intended to replace clinical judgment in the management of individual patients. A detailed description of the methods, background, and evidence summaries that sup-port each recommendation can be found in the full text of the guideline.
RECOMMENDATIONS FOR ASYMPTOMATIC 
BACTERIURIA
I. Should Asymptomatic Bacteriuria Be Screened for and Treated in 
Pediatric Patients?
Recommendation
 1. In infants and children, we recommend against screening 
for or treating asymptomatic bacteriuria (ASB) (strong rec -
ommendation, low-quality evidence).
II. Should ASB Be Screened for or Treated in Healthy Nonpregnant Women?
Recommendation
 1. In healthy premenopausal, nonpregnant women or healthy 
postmenopausal women, we recommend against screening 
for or treating ASB (strong recommendation, moderate-qual-
ity evidence).
Figure 1. Approach and implications to rating the quality of evidence and strength of recommendations using the Grading of Recommendations Assessment, Development 
and Evaluation (GRADE) methodology (unrestricted use of the figure granted by the US GRADE Network).Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article/68/10/e83/5407612 by MUSC Library user on 12 November 2025

IDSA 2019 Clinical Practice Guideline for the Management of Asymptomatic Bacteriuria • cid  2019:68 (15 May) • e85III. Should ASB Be Screened for and Treated in Pregnant Women?
Recommendations
 1. In pregnant women, we recommend screening for and treat-
ing ASB (strong recommendation, moderate-quality evidence). 
Remarks: A recent study in the Netherlands suggested that nontreatment of ASB may be an acceptable option for selected low-risk women. However, the committee felt that 
further evaluation in other populations was necessary to 
confirm the generalizability of this observation. We suggest a urine culture collected at 1 of the initial visits early in preg-nancy. There is insufficient evidence to inform a recommen-dation for or against repeat screening during the pregnancy for a woman with an initial negative screening culture or fol-lowing treatment of an initial episode of ASB.
 2. In pregnant women with ASB, we suggest 4–7 days of anti-
microbial treatment rather than a shorter duration (weak rec -
ommendation, low-quality evidence). Remarks: The optimal 
duration of therapy will vary depending on the antimicrobial given; the shortest effective course should be used.
IV. Should ASB Be Screened for and Treated in Functionally Impaired Older 
Women or Men Residing in the Community, or in Older Residents of Long-term Care Facilities?
Recommendations
 1. In older, community-dwelling persons who are functionally 
impaired, we recommend against screening for or treating 
ASB ( strong recommendation, low-quality evidence).
 2. In older persons resident in long-term care facilities, we rec-
ommend against screening for or treating ASB (strong recom -
mendation, moderate-quality evidence).
V. In an Older, Functionally or Cognitively Impaired Patient, Which 
Nonlocalizing Symptoms Distinguish ASB From Symptomatic UTI?
Recommendations
 1. In older patients with functional and/or cognitive impairment 
with bacteriuria and delirium (acute mental status change, 
confusion) and without local genitourinary symptoms or other systemic signs of infection (eg, fever or hemodynamic instability), we recommend assessment for other causes and 
careful observation rather than antimicrobial treatment 
(strong recommendation, very low-quality evidence).
 2. In older patients with functional and/or cognitive impairment 
with bacteriuria and without local genitourinary symptoms or other systemic signs of infection (fever, hemodynamic in-stability) who experience a fall, we recommend assessment for other causes and careful observation rather than anti-microbial treatment of bacteriuria (strong recommendation, very low-quality evidence). Values and preferences: This 
recommendation places a high value on avoiding adverse 
outcomes of antimicrobial therapy such as Clostridioides dif -
ficile  infection, increased antimicrobial resistance, or adverse 
drug effects, in the absence of evidence that such treatment 
is beneficial for this vulnerable population. Remarks: For the bacteriuric patient with fever and other systemic signs poten-
tially consistent with a severe infection (sepsis) and without 
a localizing source, broad-spectrum antimicrobial therapy directed against urinary and nonurinary sources should be initiated.
VI. Should Diabetic Patients Be Screened or Treated for ASB?
Recommendation
 1. In patients with diabetes, we recommend against screening 
for or treating ASB (strong recommendation, moderate-qual-ity evidence). Remarks: The recommendation for nontreat-
ment of men is inferred from observations in studies that have primarily enrolled women.
VII. Should Patients Who Have Received a Kidney Transplant Be Screened 
or Treated for ASB?
Recommendation
 1. In renal transplant recipients who have had renal transplant 
surgery >1 month prior, we recommend against screening 
for or treating ASB (strong recommendation, high-quality ev-
idence ). Remarks: There is insufficient evidence to inform 
a recommendation for or against screening or treatment of ASB within the first month following renal transplantation.
VIII. Should Patients Who Have Received a Solid Organ Transplant Other 
Than a Renal Transplant Be Screened or Treated for ASB?
Recommendation
 1. In patients with nonrenal solid organ transplant (SOT), we 
recommend against screening for or treating ASB (strong 
recommendation, moderate-quality evidence). Values and 
preferences:  This recommendation places a high value on 
avoidance of antimicrobial use so as to limit the acquisi-
tion of antimicrobial-resistant organisms or Clostridioides 
difficile  infection in SOT patients, who are at increased 
risk for these adverse outcomes. Remarks: In nonrenal SOT recipients, symptomatic UTI is uncommon and ad-verse consequences of symptomatic UTI are extremely rare; the risk of complications from ASB is, therefore, probably negligible.
IX. Should Patients With Neutropenia Be Screened or Treated for ASB?
Recommendation
 1. In patients with high-risk neutropenia (absolute neutro-
phil count <100 cells/mm3, ≥7 days’ duration following che-
motherapy), we make no recommendation for or against screening for or treatment of ASB (knowledge gap). Remarks: For patients with high-risk neutropenia managed with cur -
rent standards of care, including prophylactic antimicrobial 
therapy and prompt initiation of antimicrobial therapy when 
febrile illness occurs, it is unclear how frequently ASB occurs and how often it progresses to symptomatic UTI. Patients with low-risk neutropenia (>100 cells/mm
3, ≤7 days, clini-
cally stable) have only a very small risk of infection and there Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article/68/10/e83/5407612 by MUSC Library user on 12 November 2025

e86 • cid  2019:68 (15 May) • Nicolle et alis no evidence to suggest that, in this population, ASB has 
greater risk than for nonneutropenic populations.
X. Should ASB Be Screened for or Treated in Individuals With Impaired 
Voiding Following Spinal Cord Injury?
Recommendation
 1. In patients with spinal cord injury (SCI), we recommend 
against screening for or treating ASB (strong recommen -
dation, low-quality evidence). Remarks: Clinical signs and 
symptoms of UTI experienced by patients with SCI may 
differ from the classic genitourinary symptoms experi-
enced by patients with normal sensation. The atypical pre-
sentation of UTI in these patients should be considered in making decisions with respect to treatment or nontreatment of bacteriuria.
XI. Should Patients With an Indwelling Urethral Catheter Be Screened or 
Treated for ASB?
Recommendations
 1. In patients with a short-term indwelling urethral catheter 
(<30 days), we recommend against screening for or treat-
ing ASB (strong recommendation, low-quality evidence). Remarks: Considerations are likely to be similar for patients with indwelling suprapubic catheters, and it is reasonable to 
manage these patients similar to patients with indwelling 
urethral catheters, for both short-term and long-term supra-pubic catheterization.
 2. In patients with indwelling catheters, we make no recom-
mendation for or against screening for and treating ASB at the time of catheter removal (knowledge gap). Remarks: Antimicrobial prophylaxis given at the time of catheter re-moval may confer a benefit for prevention of symptomatic UTI for some patients. The evidence to support this obser -
vation is largely from studies enrolling surgical patients who 
receive prophylactic antimicrobials at the time of short-term 
catheter removal, generally without screening to determine if ASB is present. It is unclear whether or not the benefit is greater in patients with ASB.
 3. In patients with long-term indwelling catheters, we recom-
mend against screening for or treating ASB (strong recom -
mendation, low-quality evidence).
XII. Should Patients Undergoing Elective Nonurologic Surgery Be 
Screened and Treated for ASB?
Recommendation
 1. In patients undergoing elective nonurologic surgery, we rec-
ommend against screening for or treating ASB (strong recom -
mendation, low-quality evidence).
XIII. Should Patients Undergoing Endourological Procedures Be Screened or Treated for ASB?
Recommendations
 1. In patients who will undergo endoscopic urologic pro-
cedures associated with mucosal trauma, we recommend screening for and treating ASB prior to surgery (strong 
recommendation, moderate-quality evidence). Values and 
preferences:  This recommendation places a high value on 
the avoidance of the serious postoperative complication of 
sepsis, which is a substantial risk for patients undergoing 
invasive endourologic procedures in the presence of bacte-riuria. Remarks: In individuals with bacteriuria, these are 
procedures in a heavily contaminated surgical field. High-quality evidence from other surgical procedures shows that perioperative antimicrobial treatment or prophylaxis for contaminated or clean-contaminated procedures confers important benefits.
 2. In patients who will undergo endoscopic urologic proce-
dures, we suggest that a urine culture be obtained prior to 
the procedure and targeted antimicrobial therapy prescribed 
rather than empiric therapy (weak recommendation, very low-quality evidence).
 3. In patients with ASB who will undergo a urologic proce-
dure, we suggest a short course (1 or 2 doses) rather than more prolonged antimicrobial therapy (weak recommenda -
tion, low-quality evidence). Remarks: Antimicrobial therapy 
should be initiated 30–60 minutes before the procedure.
XIV. Should Patients Undergoing Implantation of Urologic Devices or 
Living With Urologic Devices Be Screened for or Treated for ASB?
Recommendations
 1. In patients planning to undergo surgery for an artificial urine 
sphincter or penile prosthesis implantation, we suggest not 
screening for or treating ASB (weak recommendation, very low-quality evidence). Remarks: All patients should receive 
standard perioperative antimicrobial prophylaxis prior to de-
vice implantation.
 2. In patients living with implanted urologic devices, we sug-
gest not screening for or treating ASB (weak recommenda -
tion, very low-quality evidence).
INTRODUCTION
ASB is common in healthy women and in adults and chil-
dren with urologic abnormalities associated with impaired voiding [6–19] (Table 1). ASB was first described when early studies validating the use of the quantitative urine culture for urinary infection reported a high prevalence of positive urine cultures, with or without pyuria, in some populations of women, without accompanying genitourinary symptoms attributable to infection [20]. At that time, one of the most 
common causes of renal failure was attributed to “chronic 
pyelonephritis, ” a histologic finding that was presumed to be caused by infection. In addition, early studies consistently observed that a high proportion of women with persistent ASB initially identified in early pregnancy developed pyelo-nephritis and potential negative fetal outcomes later in the Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article/68/10/e83/5407612 by MUSC Library user on 12 November 2025

IDSA 2019 Clinical Practice Guideline for the Management of Asymptomatic Bacteriuria • cid  2019:68 (15 May) • e87pregnancy. Thus, ASB was interpreted as an ominous finding 
that warranted screening and treatment.
Subsequent observational and intervention studies evaluating 
long-term screening and treatment in schoolchildren, pregnant women, and healthy women suggested that ASB was benign in 
children and in women who were not pregnant [6]. In addition, 
efforts to maintain sterile urine were often futile. Prospective, randomized studies of antimicrobials or no antimicrobials for bacteriuria in children, healthy women, older populations, patients with chronic indwelling or intermittent catheters, and patients with diabetes suggested that antimicrobial treatment did not confer any benefits. At the same time, antimicrobials 
increased the risk of outcomes such as antimicrobial resistance 
and Clostridioides difficile  infection (CDI) and, in some cases, 
increased the risk of urinary tract infection (UTI) shortly after therapy [21, 22]. For some populations with a high prevalence 
of ASB, such as patients with chronic indwelling catheters [23], older institutionalized populations [24, 25], patients with spinal 
cord injury (SCI) [15, 26], and some persons with diabetes [22], 
a sterile urine cannot be maintained, despite intense antimi-crobial use. The Infectious Diseases Society of America (IDSA) 
guidelines published in 2005 summarized this evidence for 
adults, and made recommendations for treatment or nontreat-ment of ASB in relevant populations [6].Additional evidence that has become available since 2005 for 
some of the populations addressed in the previous guideline has been reviewed for this guideline update. These updated guide-lines also include populations not considered in the previous guideline, including children, solid organ transplant (SOT) recipients, patients with neutropenia, and those undergoing nonurologic surgery. Difficulty in clinical distinction between UTI and ASB in some populations with a high prevalence of bacteriuria has been increasingly recognized. Thus, this up-date also addresses the assessment of potential nonlocalizing 
symptoms for subjects in populations with a high prevalence 
of bacteriuria, where diagnostic uncertainty may compro-mise implementation of nontreatment recommendations. Asymptomatic candiduria, which was addressed in the 2005 guideline, has been recently reviewed and recommendations made in IDSA ’s Clinical Practice Guideline for the Management of Candidiasis: 2016 Update [27], and is not included here.
There are important considerations unique to the use of anti-
microbials. Antimicrobial use drives antimicrobial resistance in the community, as well as in the individual treated. Since the publication of the 2005 guideline, antimicrobial resistance in bacteria isolated from UTI has evolved substantially, and extended-spectrum β-lactamase–producing and carbapen-emase-producing Enterobacteriaceae are isolated frequently from UTI in many areas of the world [28, 29]. Antimicrobial 
stewardship programs have identified the treatment of ASB as 
an important contributor to inappropriate antimicrobial use, 
which promotes resistance [30–34]. A positive urine culture often encourages antimicrobial use, irrespective of symptoms [34–37]. Thus, obtaining urine cultures when not clinically indicated, including for routine screening, promotes inappro-priate antimicrobial use. Given the potential negative societal consequence of antimicrobial resistance, the guideline com-mittee felt that screening for bacteriuria and treatment of ASB should be discouraged unless there is evidence to support a benefit of treatment for a given population. This guideline is 
most applicable to those who similarly place a high value on 
addressing the problem of increasing antimicrobial resistance and other harms of antimicrobial exposure, and a lower value on very small or uncertain benefits to individuals.
Scope and Purpose
The purpose of this document is to provide evidence-based guidance on the screening and treatment of ASB in popula-tions where ASB has been identified as common or potentially detrimental. The target audience for this guideline includes all healthcare professionals who care for patients who may have 
ASB. These include general internists, internal medicine sub-
specialists (infectious diseases, nephrology, endocrinology, and others), surgeons, urologists, pediatricians, obstetricians and gynecologists, geriatricians, physical medicine specialists, fam-ily practitioners, hospitalists, pharmacists, nurse practitioners, Table 1. Prevalence of Asymptomatic Bacteriuria Reported for Different 
Populations
Population Prevalence, % Reference
Children
 Boys <1[7]
 Girls 1–2[8–10]
Healthy women   
 Premenopausal 1 .0–5.0[11]
 Pregnant 1 .9–9.5[11]
 Postmenopausal (age 50–70 y) 2.8–8.6[11]
Persons with diabetes   
 Women 10.8–16[12]
 Men 0.7–11[12]
Elderly persons in the community (age ≥70 y)   
 Women 10.8–16[13]
 Men 3.6–19[13]
Elderly persons in a long-term care facility   
 Women 25–50[13]
 Men 15–50[13]
Persons with spinal cord injury   
 Intermittent catheter use 23–69[14]
 Sphincterotomy/condom catheter 57[15]
Persons with kidney transplant   
 First month posttransplant 23–24[16, 17]
 1 mo–1 y post-transplant 10–17[16]
 >1 y post-transplant 2–9[16]
Persons with indwelling catheter use   
 Short-term 3%–5%/day 
catheter[18]
 Long-term 100[19]Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article/68/10/e83/5407612 by MUSC Library user on 12 November 2025

e88 • cid  2019:68 (15 May) • Nicolle et aland physician assistants. To determine the scope of the current 
guidelines, the panel considered whether there were any new data that might change the recommendations from the last IDSA guideline for ASB [6]. The panel also reviewed guidelines from other organizations relevant to the management of ASB.
Values and Preferences
Values and preferences were considered from the viewpoint of the patient and from the societal perspective. We believe that most patients would wish to receive antimicrobial therapy for ASB if the potential benefits of treatment outweigh possible harms. Where treatment of ASB is unlikely to confer a ben-
efit, the risks of antimicrobial therapy, including adverse drug 
effects, CDI [38, 39], and the potential for inducing antimicro-
bial resistance, suggest that most individuals would not wish to receive antimicrobial treatment. From the societal perspec-tive, avoidance of antimicrobial use where there is no benefit of therapy is preferred to minimize antimicrobial adverse effects and limit emergence of antimicrobial resistance, which may re-
strict future therapeutic efficacy for treatment of urinary tract 
or other infections. When the quality of evidence is low, and there is no suggestion of potential harm, we generally recom-mend against the treatment of ASB because of the high-quality evidence that antimicrobial therapy contributes to antimicrobial resistance. From a payer perspective, the cost of urine screening for ASB and of antimicrobial therapy in patients with ASB is more important than the very uncertain possibility of a small reduction in symptomatic UTI or other outcomes for popula-
tions where there is no evidence of benefit with treatment of 
ASB.
Definitions
The definition of ASB in patients without indwelling cathe-ters is ≥10
5 colony-forming units (CFU)/mL (≥108 CFU/L) in 
a voided urine specimen without signs or symptoms attribut-able to UTI [6]. For women, 2 consecutive specimens should be obtained, preferably within 2 weeks, to confirm the persistence of bacteriuria. Between 10% and 60% of women, varying with 
the population, do not have persistent bacteriuria on repeat 
screening after an initial positive specimen [22, 24, 40–45]. For 
men, a single urine specimen meeting these quantitative criteria 
is sufficient for diagnosis [46]. Patients with indwelling devices 
often have multiple organisms isolated from the urine, some of which are present at lower quantitative counts. Organisms present in lower quantitative counts likely represent contamina-tion of the urine specimen from organisms present in the bio-film along the device rather than true bacteriuria and, in these patients, ≥10
5 CFU/mL remains the most appropriate diagnos-
tic criteria for bladder bacteriuria [47, 48]. Lower quantitative 
counts (≥102 to <105 CFU/mL) isolated from urine specimens 
collected by “in and out” catheterization or following insertion of a new indwelling catheter suggest true bacteriuria, but the clinical significance of these lower quantitative counts in people without symptoms has not been evaluated.
METHODOLOGY
Panel Composition
The IDSA Guidelines for the Management of Asymptomatic Bacteriuria in Adults were published in 2005 [6]. For this up-date, the IDSA Standards and Practice Guideline Committee (SPGC) convened a multidisciplinary panel of 15 individuals with expertise relevant to ASB encompassing different patient 
groups, including infectious diseases as well as representation 
from family practice, pediatrics, geriatrics, obstetrics and gyne-cology, and urology. The panel also included individuals with expertise in systematic literature search and guideline/health research methodology.
Disclosure and Management of Potential Conflicts of Interests
The expert panel complied with the IDSA policy on conflicts of interest, which requires disclosure of any financial or other 
interests that may be construed as constituting actual, potential, 
or apparent conflict. Panel members were provided IDSA ’s con-flicts of interest disclosure statement and were asked to iden-tify ties to companies developing products that may be affected by promulgation of the guideline. Information was requested regarding employment, consultancies, stock ownership, hono-raria, research funding, expert testimony, and membership on company advisory committees. Decisions were made on a case-by-case basis as to whether an individual’s role should be lim-ited as a result of conflict. Potential conflicts of interest are listed 
in the Notes section.
Clinical Questions and Evidence Review
An initial list of relevant clinical questions for these guidelines 
was created by the committee members addressing a specific topic, then submitted to the whole panel for review and dis-cussion. After the committee reviewed the proposed topics, the final set of clinical questions was approved by the whole 
committee. All outcomes of interest were prespecified, with 
emphasis on outcomes important to patients and society, and 
a de-emphasis on surrogate outcomes. At least 2 panel mem-
bers were assigned to review the recent literature for each 
topic, evaluate the evidence, determine the strength of recom-mendations, and develop written evidence in support of these recommendations.
Panel subgroups generated a list of key words used by expert 
librarians to develop PICO (population, intervention, compar -
ison, outcomes) search strategies for Medline In-Process and Other Non-Indexed Citations, Medline, Embase, and Cochrane Central Register of Controlled Trials on the Ovid platform (see Supplementary Tables and Supplementary Figures A–AH for 
full search details). Results were returned to each primary au-
thor and the chair for the review. We restricted the search to Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article/68/10/e83/5407612 by MUSC Library user on 12 November 2025

IDSA 2019 Clinical Practice Guideline for the Management of Asymptomatic Bacteriuria • cid  2019:68 (15 May) • e89publications in English. For patient groups addressed in recom-
mendations in the 2005 document, the review was limited to publications from January 2005 to June 2017. For populations and topics not addressed in the 2005 guideline, the search in-cluded literature from January 1980 to June 2017. Additional 
relevant articles published prior to 1980 were identified through 
informal searching by panel experts. Systematic reviews of rel-evant topics were identified using PubMed and the Cochrane Library. The literature was reviewed by the primary topic authors to develop a list of articles for which abstract review was considered relevant. The primary reviewer and a secondary reviewer evaluated the abstracts and selected and evaluated ar -
ticles for full text review.
Evidence summaries for each question were prepared by 
the panel members using the Grading of Recommendations 
Assessment, Development and Education (GRADE) approach 
for rating the confidence and the evidence [1–3]. The summa-ries of evidence were discussed and reviewed by all committee members and edited as appropriate. Once the analyses were completed, the panelists presented their data and findings to the whole panel for deliberation and drafting of recommendations. 
Literature search strategies, evidence tables, evidence profiles, 
and additional analyses including meta-analysis results can be found in the Supplementary Tables and Supplementary Figures A–AH.
Development of Clinical Recommendations
All recommendations followed GRADE [1]. Recommendations are either “strong” or “weak” (weak recommendations are also sometimes called discretionary or conditional; see Figure 1) [1, 2]. Recommendations are strong when there is moderate- or high-quality evidence that the desirable consequences outweigh 
the undesirable consequences for a course of action. They may 
also be strong when there is high-quality evidence of harm and benefits are uncertain (ie, low or very low quality). Table 2 provides the suggested interpretation of strong and weak rec-ommendations for patients, clinicians, and healthcare policy makers. For recommendations where the comparators are not formally stated, the comparison of interest is implicitly referred to “not using the intervention” (either not using a specific treatment or diagnostic test). GRADE Evidence Profiles were 
created using MAGICapp version 8.1 (MAGIC, Oslo, Norway).
There are many important research questions for which evi-
dence is currently insufficient. “Research needs” are highlighted 
questions that the panelists believe are a priority. All members of the panel participated in the preparation of the guideline and approved the final recommendations. Final recommendations represent consensus opinion of the entire panel. For the final version of these guidelines, the panel as a group reviewed all individual sections.
This guideline has been reviewed and endorsed by the 
Society of Healthcare Epidemiology of America, Pediatric Infectious Diseases Society, American College of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Association of Medical Microbiology and Infectious Diseases Canada, European Society of Clinical Microbiology and Infectious Diseases, European Association of Urology, and the American Urological Association. The IDSA SPGC and the IDSA Board of Directors reviewed and approved 
the guideline prior to dissemination.
Future Revision Dates
At least every 2 years, the SPGC will determine the need for 
revisions to the guideline based on an examination of current literature and the likelihood that any new data will have an im-pact on the recommendations. If necessary, the entire expert panel will be reconvened to discuss potential changes. Any revi-
sion to the guideline will be submitted for review and approval 
to the IDSA SPGC and the Board of Directors.
RECOMMENDATIONS FOR ASYMPTOMATIC 
BACTERIURIA
I. Should ASB Be Screened for and Treated in Pediatric Patients?
Recommendation
 1. In infants and children, we recommend against screening 
for or treating ASB (strong recommendation, low-quality 
evidence ).
Evidence Summary
Evaluation of the benefits and risks of detection and treatment of ASB in children poses unique problems. Y oung children cannot 
Table 2. Interpretation of Strong and Weak (Conditional) Recommendations
 Strong Recommendation Weak (Conditional) Recommendation
Patients All or almost all individuals in this situation would want 
the recommended course of action, and only a small 
proportion would not.Most individuals in this situation would probably want the suggested course of ac-
tion, but many would not.
Clinicians All or almost all individuals should receive the intervention. Recognize that fully informed individuals might reasonably choose different courses 
of action. A shared decision-making process is typically useful in helping individu-als to make decisions consistent with their values and preferences.
Policy 
makersThe recommendation can be adopted as policy in most sit-
uations. Adherence to this recommendation according 
to the guideline can be used as a quality criterion or 
performance indicator.Policymaking will require substantial debate and involvement of various stakeholders.Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article/68/10/e83/5407612 by MUSC Library user on 12 November 2025

e90 • cid  2019:68 (15 May) • Nicolle et alreliably provide a clean-catch urine specimen, and studies using 
perineal bag collection for urine specimens have found that bacteriuria rates are overstated because of the high likelihood of contamination with this collection method. Important out-comes relevant to children with ASB for whom antimicrobial 
therapy is being considered include not only symptomatic in-
fection, but also the development of long-term renal scarring. Most of the evidence describing prognosis and treatment of ASB in children was performed in the 1970s and 1980s. Based on current evaluations of the quality of clinical trials, these early studies have substantial methodological limitations, including poor case definitions, small sample size, lack of randomization, no placebo group, inconsistent outcome measures, inconsistent drug choice, and lack of evaluation of risks and adverse events.
ASB is rare in children with a normal urinary tract and does 
not appear to be associated with important harms. One study from 1987 used suprapubic aspiration to obtain urine cultures at ages 2 weeks, 3 months, and 10 months and reported that ASB was present in 2.5% of boys and 0.9% of girls [49]. Eleven percent of children with ASB had grade 1–2 vesicoureteral re-flux (VUR). Of 50 children with ASB, 2 (4% [95% confidence 
interval {CI}, 0.5%–13.7%]) were subsequently diagnosed with 
acute pyelonephritis. No cases of renal scarring were observed in any of the children with ASB (95% CI, .7%–7.1%). An obser -
vational study of neonates in New Zealand [50] reported that 14 of 1460 urines obtained by bladder puncture had bacteri-uria (prevalence, 1% [95% CI, .5%–1.6%]): 5 with nonlocaliz-ing symptoms and 9 asymptomatic. Mild or moderate VUR was detected in 8 infants with bacteriuria (prevalence, 57.1% [95% CI, 28.9%–82.3%]). ASB occurred in 1.8% of female and 0.5% of male infants (aged 3–23 months) evaluated in an of-
fice setting in the United States [7] and 0.8% of preschool girls 
and no boys (aged 2–5 years). Of those with ASB, VUR was present in 46% of infants and 9% of preschool children. One study reported a higher rate of ASB in black compared to white adolescent girls, (2.5% vs 0.8%, respectively), but similar ASB prevalence in younger (5–14 years) white or black girls (0.5%) [51]. ASB was present in 1.8% of 16 800 British schoolgirls aged 5–12 years who were screened for bacteriuria and followed for up to 13 years [9]. In adolescent girls in Boston, 1.6% of females had ASB [10].
A long-term study of the epidemiology and natural history of 
ASB conducted in Virginia in the 1960s enrolled 8872 school-
aged girls followed for a 7-year period [52]. The rate of ASB was 
2.9%, and 3% had symptomatic UTI, but the rate of UTI was not compared to girls without ASB. A subset of 60 girls with persistent bacteriuria was followed up in the 1970s and com-pared to 38 matched controls [53]. Renal scarring or caliectasis were present in 16 cases and none of the controls (risk differ -
ence [RD], 32.0% [95% CI, 18.7%–45.3%]). Hospitalization rates for UTI and pyelonephritis were significantly higher in children with ASB (15%) than controls (2.6%; RD, 13.4% [95% CI, 2.0%–24.7%]). The mean serum creatinine was significantly higher in cases than in controls (0.88 vs 0.76 mg/dL) but did not exceed the normal range in any of the participants. There were no differences in mean blood pressure between groups. In a noncomparative study of a cohort of girls with ASB and ra-
diographic evidence of renal scarring, initially aged 4–14 years 
and followed until 16 years of age, acute pyelonephritis was not observed in girls with persistent bacteriuria or those who spon-taneously cleared bacteriuria [54]. The duration of bacteriuria did not influence renal growth or the glomerular filtration rate. It is not clear why the rates of renal sequelae were substantially higher in this study compared with other reports. The long-term consequences of ASB were also reported for a cohort of 116 Swedish schoolgirls followed for 3 years, of whom 12 (10%) had renal scarring, 13 (11%) VUR without scarring, and 91 
(78%) no reflux or scarring [55, 56]. Recurrence or persistence 
of ASB was common; 47% of the girls remained bacteriuric after 
3 years. Renal growth and concentrating capacity in these sub-jects remained normal.
An uncontrolled trial of antimicrobial therapy (sulfonamide, 
tetracycline, ampicillin, or nitrofurantoin) in school-aged girls 
with persistent ASB, defined as ≥ 3 consecutive positive urine 
cultures, reported a reduction in the rate of recurrent bacteri-
uria of 25% in white and 40% in black girls; 10% of girls in this study developed clinical episodes of acute pyelonephritis [57]. This study did not address long-term outcomes such as renal scarring. In a trial of short-term antimicrobial therapy in the Swedish cohort, 30 patients received nitrofurantoin and 31 no treatment [ 56]. There was 1 case of pyelonephritis and 1 case 
of cystitis in each group (RD for both, 0.1% [95% CI, –8.8% to 9.1%]). In American schoolgirls (5–7 years old) monitored 
over a 2-year period with an overall rate of ASB of 1.6% [8 ], 
a randomized controlled trial (RCT) of short-term antimicro-
bials (nitrofurantoin, ampicillin, or trimethoprim-sulfame-thoxazole [TMP-SMX]) in 63 subjects reported a lower ASB recurrence rate in the first 6 months in the treatment group, but no differences in ASB between groups at 4 years and no differences in renal scarring in treated subjects compared to untreated controls [58]. In the British schoolgirl cohort [9 ], 
a nonrandomized, open-label, controlled trial of antimicro-bial treatment (TMP-SMX, nitrofurantoin, nalidixic acid, or pivmecillinam) for 7–14 days in 110 of these girls with ASB reported no differences in subsequent symptoms of UTI, res-
olution of VUR, kidney growth, or renal scarring in treated or 
untreated girls.
A retrospective observational study described 66 Swedish 
school-aged girls being followed with long-term Escherichia coli  
ASB who received either penicillin V or erythromycin (both of unspecified dosage or duration), for treatment of streptococcal pharyngitis [ 21]. In the penicillin group, bacteriuria was erad-
icated in 5 girls, but 6 girls developed acute pyelonephritis and 1 developed cystitis within 5 months following the penicillin Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article/68/10/e83/5407612 by MUSC Library user on 12 November 2025

IDSA 2019 Clinical Practice Guideline for the Management of Asymptomatic Bacteriuria • cid  2019:68 (15 May) • e91therapy (7 of 46 [15%]), all with new E. coli strains isolated. 
Bacteriuria persisted in all girls treated with erythromycin, which is not excreted in the urine, and none developed symp-tomatic infection following antimicrobial therapy. The authors suggested that antimicrobial treatment which resolved ASB in 
girls with stable, long-term bacteriuria was a risk for short-term 
development of acute pyelonephritis.
Kemper and Avner [59] performed an analysis of the per -
formance and costs of screening of 100 000 hypothetical pre-school children. Screening of children using standard culture techniques would result in nearly 20 000 false-positive tests and 143 false negatives. Total costs for a screening program were estimated at nearly $2 million dollars in 1992.
Rationale
We make a strong recommendation because there is moder -
ate-quality evidence that there is no benefit and high-quality evidence of harm. ASB is uncommon in infants and boys and 
occurs in about 1%–3% of healthy girls. While there may be 
an increased risk of symptomatic UTI in bacteriuric children, there is no evidence of a higher risk for subsequent renal scar -
ring or renal insufficiency. In addition, there is no evidence that treatment of ASB prevents symptomatic UTI, including pye-lonephritis (low quality), renal scarring, or renal insufficiency (low quality). There is high-quality evidence to suggest that antibiotics cause harm, including adverse effects, increasing costs, and contributing to antimicrobial resistance. Most studies 
addressing ASB in children were performed >40 years ago, but 
there are no indications that the incidence or outcomes of ASB would differ today.
Research Needs
Future studies of antimicrobial therapy should include renal scarring as a primary outcome. Studies enrolling children with neuromuscular disorders and immunocompromised states should be a priority.
II. Should ASB Be Screened for or Treated in Healthy Nonpregnant Women?
Recommendation
 1. In healthy premenopausal, nonpregnant women or healthy 
postmenopausal women, we recommend against screening for or treating ASB (strong recommendation, moderate-qual-ity evidence).
Evidence Summary
The prevalence of ASB in healthy, premenopausal women ranges from 1% to 5%, and in healthy postmenopausal women in the community from 2.8% to 8.6% [6]. While symptomatic UTI occurs significantly more frequently in women with bacteriuria than in nonbacteriuric women, observational studies report 
no differences in the rates of hypertension, chronic kidney di-
sease, serum creatinine levels, abnormal intravenous pyelogram findings, or mortality in women with or without bacteriuria [6]. There were no differences in the frequency of subsequent UTI during 1 year of follow-up after treatment of bacteriuric 
women with a 1-week course of therapy with nitrofurantoin or 
placebo [60]. Thus, the 2005 IDSA ASB Guideline Committee concluded that healthy, premenopausal women with ASB have an increased risk for UTI, but no long-term adverse outcomes [6]. In addition, the Committee concluded that the treatment of ASB neither decreases the frequency of symptomatic infection nor prevents further episodes of ASB.
Other advisory bodies have reached similar conclusions. The 
US Preventive Services Task Force reaffirmed its 2004 recom-
mendations in 2008 with the recommendation that evidence 
does not support the screening of nonpregnant women or men for ASB, as improved clinical outcomes cannot be demonstrated [61]. A recent systematic review of antimicrobial treatment of ASB in noncatheterized adults also concluded that antimicro-bial treatment of ASB may improve short-term microbiologic outcomes, but the microbiologic resolution is not sustained and 
there is no measurable improvement in morbidity or mortality 
[62].
This review identified no additional studies published since 
2005 that would alter the previous recommendation. A recent study performed in the Netherlands enrolled women to receive either prophylactic TMP-SMX or Lactobacillus  species probi-
otic. During 15 months of follow-up, no difference in the time to a subsequent symptomatic UTI between women with and without ASB at baseline was observed. The authors concluded 
that ASB was not a predictor for the development of a sympto-
matic UTI [63].
There is some evidence suggesting that persistent ASB may 
protect from symptomatic UTI [20]. An early randomized trial of therapy for women with ASB reported that most sympto-matic reinfections occurred in the antimicrobial treatment group, suggesting that treatment of bacteriuria may be associ-ated with an increased risk of symptomatic UTI [60]. A recent nonblinded, randomized clinical trial reported outcomes fol-lowing antimicrobial treatment or no treatment for 673 young 
women presenting to a sexually transmitted disease clinic. All 
participants had at least 1 episode of symptomatic UTI in the 
past year and ASB on 2 consecutive urine specimens when eval-
uated in the clinic [64]. Antimicrobial therapy for treatment of 
ASB was an independent risk factor (hazard ratio, 3.09 [95% CI, 2.19–4.20]) for developing symptomatic UTI in the year following treatment. There was 1 episode of pyelonephritis in the untreated group and 2 in the treated group. The authors concluded that ASB in women with a history of recurrent UTI may be protective in preventing symptomatic recurrence. However, a high proportion (33%) of these women had ASB with Enterococcus  species isolated, which would generally be 
considered a contaminant, and symptomatic episodes were not confirmed microbiologically.Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article/68/10/e83/5407612 by MUSC Library user on 12 November 2025

e92 • cid  2019:68 (15 May) • Nicolle et alRationale
Although women with ASB may also be at increased risk of 
symptomatic UTI, ASB, even when persistent, appears not to be associated with other adverse outcomes, and there is no evi-dence to suggest that episodes of symptomatic UTI are attribut-able to the ASB. Moreover, treatment of ASB may not decrease 
the frequency of symptomatic UTI, including pyelonephritis 
(moderate quality). Antibiotics may increase rather than de-crease the risk of subsequent UTI (moderate quality). There is high-quality evidence that antibiotics have an increased risk of adverse effects, that screening and treating ASB is extremely costly, and that the use of antibiotics promotes emergence of antimicrobial resistance.
III. Should ASB Be Screened for and Treated in Pregnant Women?
Recommendations
 1. In pregnant women, we recommend screening for and 
treating ASB (strong recommendation, moderate-quality evidence ). Remarks: A recent study in the Netherlands 
suggested that nontreatment of ASB may be an acceptable option for selected low-risk women. However, the com-
mittee felt that further evaluation in other populations was 
necessary to confirm the generalizability of this observa-tion. We suggest a urine culture collected at one of the ini-tial visits early in pregnancy. There is insufficient evidence to inform a recommendation for or against repeat screening during the pregnancy for a woman with an initial negative screening culture or following treatment of an initial epi-sode of ASB.
 2. In pregnant women with ASB, we suggest 4–7 days of anti-
microbial treatment rather than a shorter duration (weak rec -
ommendation, low-quality evidence). Remarks: The optimal 
duration of therapy will vary depending on the antimicrobial given; the shortest effective course should be used.
Evidence Summary
Screening for and Treatment of Bacteriuria
ASB occurs in 2%–7% of pregnant women [6, 65]. The 2005 
IDSA guideline recommended screening and treatment of ASB to decrease pyelonephritis in pregnant women, based on pro-spective randomized studies from the 1960s to 1980s, which uniformly reported that antimicrobial treatment decreased 
the incidence of pyelonephritis from 20%–35% to 1%–4% [6]. 
Some studies also reported decreased low birth weight (<2500 g) and premature labor. Guidelines from other organizations including the American College of Obstetrics and Gynecology [66] and the US Preventive Services Task Force [67] support this recommendation.
A 2015 Cochrane review included 14 RCTs, for the most 
part published in the 1960s and 1970s [68]. Based on 11 RCTs (1932 women), antimicrobials probably reduce the risk of pye-lonephritis in pregnant women with ASB (moderate quality). While the Cochrane review rated the quality of evidence very low, we thought that the consistency of the observation of ben-efit and the large treatment effect warranted a higher rating (see Supplementary Table F). Based on 2 RCTs, antimicrobials 
may reduce the risk of preterm birth (low quality). The baseline risk of preterm birth in women with untreated ASB is about 53 per 1000 [69]; antibiotics may reduce the risk to approxi-mately 14 per 1000 (RD, –39 [95% CI, –47 to –20]; low quality). 
Antibiotics probably lower the chance of very low birth weight 
from approximately 137 per 1000 to 88 per 1000 (RD, –49 [95% CI, –75 to –10]; moderate quality).
In the Netherlands, screening for ASB in pregnancy has not 
been instituted as a routine practice for prenatal care. A 2015 prospective study undertaken in that country, which included an underpowered nested RCT of treatment of ASB, reported that pregnant women with untreated ASB had higher rates of pyelonephritis than did women without ASB or with ASB that was treated [69]. The frequency of pyelonephritis in women 
with untreated ASB was, however, substantially lower (2.4%) 
than reported in earlier studies. Low birth rate and preterm birth rates did not differ significantly between the 2 groups. The generalizability of these observations is limited as ASB was identified with only a single urine culture and the study enrolled women at low risk of preterm birth or complicated 
UTI, who would be expected to have lower rates of pyelone-
phritis, preterm labor, and low birth weight. While the authors suggest that routine screening for and treatment of ASB in this population may not be warranted, further evidence from other populations is necessary to evaluate the risks and benefits for all pregnant women and in settings with variable access to healthcare.
The 2005 guideline recommended “periodic” repeat 
screening for pregnant women following treatment of ASB, with retreatment and prophylactic antimicrobial therapy if 
there was recurrence. We did not find any direct evidence that 
addresses whether there is a benefit of repeated screening fol-lowing treatment of ASB, or of retreatment of women with recurrent ASB. In addition, there was insufficient evidence evaluating the benefits or risks of prophylactic antimicrobial therapy in preventing ASB recurrence for the duration of the pregnancy.
Rationale
In pregnant women with ASB, antimicrobials probably reduce the risk of pyelonephritis and may reduce the risk of low birth weight. Antimicrobials may also reduce the risk of preterm labor. The randomized trials are generally old and limited by lack of allocation concealment and blinding, but all showed a 
consistently large effect on important outcomes. Serious ad-
verse effects from antimicrobials almost certainly occur much less frequently than the expected reduction in pyelonephritis and preterm birth.Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article/68/10/e83/5407612 by MUSC Library user on 12 November 2025

IDSA 2019 Clinical Practice Guideline for the Management of Asymptomatic Bacteriuria • cid  2019:68 (15 May) • e93Research Needs
Prenatal management has changed substantially since the 
studies that identified a benefit of treatment of ASB were pub-lished. The Netherlands study suggests that screening and treat-ment of ASB may not be beneficial for all pregnant women. Rigorous clinical trials to evaluate different approaches to 
screening and treatment of ASB in populations of pregnant 
women managed with current standards of practice, which de-scribe both pyelonephritis and neonatal outcomes, would be helpful. The benefits of repeated screening for women following treatment of ASB also need to be evaluated, and the cost-effec-tiveness of these programs described.
Duration of Treatment of ASB in Pregnant Women
A Cochrane review from 2015 [70] included 13 studies enrolling 1622 women that compared single-dose to short-course (4–7 days) antimicrobials. There was a trend toward lower rates of clearance of bacteriuria with the single-dose regimens (1.28 [95% CI, .87–1.88]; low quality). In 1 moderate-quality study included in this 
review [71], 714 women enrolled from Thailand, the Philippines, 
Vietnam, and Argentina received 7 days or single-dose therapy with nitrofurantoin. Seven days of therapy was more effective than a single dose in preventing the adverse outcome of lower birth weight (relative risk [RR], 1.65 [95% CI, 1.06–2.57]), but no differences in pyelonephritis or preterm delivery were observed between the 2 study arms. The review concludes that current rec-ommendations for a 4- to 7-day duration of antimicrobial therapy are reasonable but based on low-quality evidence.
The optimal duration of therapy, however, will be antimicrobi-
al-specific. Nitrofurantoin and β-lactam antimicrobials (usually ampicillin or cephalexin) are preferred because of their safety in pregnant women, but these agents are less effective as short-course therapy for treatment of acute cystitis in women [72]. The Cochrane review findings are consistent with this observation. A single dose of fosfomycin is effective for clearance of bacteria in the urine, but there is limited clinical evaluation of use in preg-nancy, and outcomes such as pyelonephritis and preterm labor are not yet well studied for this regimen [72–76].
Research Needs
Studies evaluating the optimal duration of treatment for dif-ferent antimicrobial regimens for ASB in pregnancy, including fosfomycin and the impacts of the different regimens on neo-natal outcomes, are needed.
IV. Should ASB Be Screened for and Treated in Functionally Impaired Older 
Women or Men Residing in the Community, or in Older Residents of Long-term Care Facilities?
Recommendations
 1. In older, community-dwelling persons who are functionally 
impaired, we recommend against screening for or treating 
ASB ( strong recommendation, low-quality evidence). 2. In older persons resident in long-term care facilities, we rec-
ommend against screening for or treating ASB (strong recom -
mendation, moderate-quality evidence).
Evidence Summary
The 2005 guideline recommended that older persons residing in the community or long-term care facilities should not be screened or treated for ASB, based on evidence from long-term cohort studies with follow-up of years to decades, and random-ized comparative trials in women and men [24, 25, 77–79]. No 
additional studies published since 2005 were identified which addressed the question of treatment of ASB in older function-ally impaired residents in the community. Thus, the recommen-dation for nontreatment remains the same.
Prospective cohort studies in long-term care residents pub-
lished since 2005 have evaluated adherence to minimum clin-ical criteria [80] for initiation of antimicrobial therapy for UTI in bacteriuric patients. Treatment of presumed UTI, despite ab-
sence of these minimum signs and symptoms, is common [81, 
82]. Only 16% of bacteriuric residents with advanced dementia met minimum criteria for a diagnosis of symptomatic UTI in 1 report, but 75% of these received treatment [83]. Antimicrobial therapy, regardless of route of administration, conferred no sur -
vival benefit, even when adjusted for functional status, highest recorded temperature, or mental status change (adjusted hazard ratio for death, 1.09 [95% CI, .43–2.75] for oral therapy vs no 
therapy) [83]. No additional benefit, and some adverse out-
comes, has been reported because of treatment [84–86]. In another study, an increased frequency of bacteriuric episodes was significantly associated with an increased frequency of re-ceiving an antimicrobial and of subsequent isolation of multi-drug-resistant gram-negative bacilli in urine, but not changes in mental status or admission to hospital for UTI [87]. A ret-rospective study of bacteriuric patients who received treatment for UTI but did not meet minimum diagnostic criteria reported that the risk of CDI within 3 months of therapy was >8.5-fold 
higher for patients who received antimicrobial treatment than 
those who did not [88].
Several investigators have evaluated potential biomarkers to 
assist in differentiating ASB from symptomatic UTI in older residents of nursing homes, given the clinical uncertainty in identifying symptomatic infection in residents with bacteri-uria [89–93]. Studies of inflammatory responses in bacteriuric long-term care residents (degree of pyuria, interleukin-6 [IL-6], and heparin-binding protein) have not reliably correlated with typical (localizing) or nonspecific symptoms associated with presumed UTI (fatigue, anorexia, confusion, falls, aggression, restlessness) or with ASB [89, 90]. Neutrophil-driven inflam-
matory responses including pyuria or urine IL-6 do not reliably discriminate between ASB and symptomatic UTI and are not, at present, helpful to distinguish between them [90–93].Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article/68/10/e83/5407612 by MUSC Library user on 12 November 2025

e94 • cid  2019:68 (15 May) • Nicolle et alRationale
We make strong recommendations because there is low- 
or moderate-quality evidence that there is no benefit and high-quality evidence of harm. In the elderly, antibiotic treat-ment of ASB likely does not reduce the risk of death (relative difference, 13 per 1000 [95% CI, –25 to 85]; low-quality evi-
dence), or of sepsis (RD, 100 fewer per 1000 [95% CI, –260 to 
60]; very low-quality evidence). There are high-quality data to suggest that adverse effects are particularly common following the use of antimicrobials in this population, including CDI and isolation of organisms with increased antimicrobial resistance.
Research Needs
Evaluation of potential biomarkers to differentiate symp-tomatic UTI and ASB in older functionally impaired persons should be pursued. Identifying objective criteria to diagnose symptomatic UTI is essential to facilitate optimal management for these older populations, including limiting inappropriate 
antimicrobial use.
V. In an Older, Functionally or Cognitively Impaired Patient, Which 
Nonlocalizing Symptoms Distinguish ASB From Symptomatic UTI?
Recommendations
 1. In older patients with functional and/or cognitive im-
pairment with bacteriuria and delirium (acute mental 
status change, confusion) and without local genitourinary symptoms or other systemic signs of infection (eg, fever or hemodynamic instability), we recommend assessment 
for other causes and careful observation rather than anti-
microbial treatment (strong recommendation, low-quality evidenc e).
 2. In older patients with functional and/or cognitive im-
pairment with bacteriuria and without local genitourinary symptoms or other systemic signs of infection (fever, he-modynamic instability) who experience a fall, we recom-mend assessment for other causes and careful observation rather than antimicrobial treatment of bacteriuria (strong recommendation, very low-quality evidence). Values and 
preferences : This recommendation places a high value on 
avoiding adverse outcomes of antimicrobial therapy such as CDI, increased antimicrobial resistance, or adverse drug effects, in the absence of evidence that such treatment is beneficial for this vulnerable population. Remarks: For the bacteriuric patient with fever and other systemic signs potentially consistent with a severe infection (sepsis) and without a localizing source, broad-spectrum antimicrobial therapy directed against urinary and nonurinary sources 
should be initiated.
Evidence Summary
Classic symptoms of UTI include focal genitourinary symptoms 
such as urinary frequency, urgency, dysuria, and costovertebral angle tenderness [80]. Patients without focal genitourinary symptoms are generally considered asymptomatic [81, 82]. 
However, bacteriuric patients without these symptoms but with systemic signs such as change in mental status, delirium, or falls, may present a diagnostic challenge. In practice, these 
patients are often treated with antibiotics for UTI [85]. This is 
particularly true in patients with dementia or other conditions that limit the ability to communicate.
Mental Status Changes
Observational evidence suggests that patients with delirium are more likely to have bacteriuria than patients without delirium [94, 95]. However, confounding factors such as age, comorbid-
ities, and reduced mobility were not fully adjusted for in these observational studies, and there is a high probability of residual 
confounding. Therefore, a causal relationship between bac-
teriuria and delirium has not been established. One small co-hort study found a higher rate of bacteriuria in patients who were delirious postoperatively (8 of 36 [22%]) compared to those without delirium (7 of 108 [6.5%]) [96], but this study was not large enough to properly control for confounders. In a larger prospective cohort study of nursing home residents [94], 
change in mental status was associated with bacteriuria plus 
pyuria in patients treated for UTI (odds ratio [OR], 1.38 [95% CI, 1.03–1.74]). A follow-up study of the same cohort reported that change in mental status was not significantly associated with the number of episodes of bacteriuria (zero, 1, ≥2) after adjusting for resident factors [87]. A cohort study of residents from 22 nursing homes in Sweden also reported no difference in the prevalence of bacteriuria among those with nonspecific symptoms including confusion (31% of 85) compared with 
those without nonspecific symptoms (32% of 336; P &#x003D; 
.74) [97]. IL-6 concentrations also did not differ between bac-teriuric residents with and without nonspecific symptoms [89]. Thus, observational data suggest that the relationship between delirium and bacteriuria is likely attributable to underlying host factors, and consistent with a high frequency of both of these events in these older populations rather than a true inflamma-tory or infection-related association.
Outcomes of antimicrobial treatment or no treatment 
in patients with ASB and mental status change or delirium have been reported for only a few studies. Older residents of a long-term care ward with ASB, without fever or UTI symp-toms, were randomized to treatment with norfloxacin 400 mg 
twice daily or placebo for 7 days (29 patients in each group) 
and evaluated on a behavioral rating scale before treatment, at end of treatment, and 1 and 3 months posttreatment [98]. The mean scores were higher (worse) in the treatment group, but not statistically different at any time, and worsened in both groups (18.1 to 19.1 with norfloxacin and 15.7 to 16.6 with pla-cebo). Although details of the individual behavioral features are not provided, antimicrobial treatment did not improve mean Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article/68/10/e83/5407612 by MUSC Library user on 12 November 2025

IDSA 2019 Clinical Practice Guideline for the Management of Asymptomatic Bacteriuria • cid  2019:68 (15 May) • e95behavioral scores in these patients with ASB. In a more recent 
observational study, outcomes were reported for 320 hospital-ized patients who had urine cultures sent to the microbiology laboratory and documentation in the hospital record of the indication for obtaining urine cultures; 191 (57%) had changes 
in mental status as the indication for the culture [99]. Among 
the 67 patients with ASB (no focal UTI symptoms), 44 (66%) presented with confusion or delirium and 43 (64%) were treated with antimicrobials. Patients with confusion or mental status change had a higher rate of antimicrobial treatment compared with patients without these presentations (75% vs 43%, respec-tively; OR, 1.81 [95% CI, 1.19–4.12]). In-hospital mortality did not significantly differ in patients with ASB who were treated or not treated (0% vs 4.2%; P &#x003D; .36). Other outcomes such as CDI and antimicrobial resistance were not reported.
In another recent study [100], hospitalized patients aged 
≥70 years were prospectively screened for delirium every 2 
days and followed until discharge. The impact of treatment vs no treatment of ASB on death, permanent institutional-ization, or functional decline was assessed in patients with and without delirium. Delirious patients treated for ASB 
had poorer functional outcome compared with ASB patients 
without delirium who were not treated (adjusted OR, 3.45 [95% CI, 1.27–9.38]). In 68 delirious patients in whom ASB was treated, there was no significant functional recovery when compared to 22 patients without treatment (unadjusted RR, 1.10 [95% CI, .86–1.41]). Delirious patients treated for ASB were more likely to develop CDI than untreated patients (OR, 2.45 [95% CI, .86–6.96]).
Delirium tends to have a fluctuating course. Careful ob-
servation of patients with delirium and evaluation for other 
contributing factors, such as dehydration, is a strategy for re-
ducing unnecessary antimicrobial use for bacteriuria [95]. It is unknown whether antimicrobial therapy for ASB in patients with delirium is beneficial when fever or other systemic signs of infection are present and no other localizing source of in-fection is apparent [101]. For older patients with severe clinical presentations consistent with sepsis syndrome and for whom an alternate infection site is not apparent, institution of em-piric antimicrobial therapy effective for potential UTI, as well as other sites of infection, may be appropriate pending culture results.
Falls
Falls are common among older populations who also have a high prevalence of ASB, and often lead to a diagnosis of UTI and initiation of antimicrobial therapy, in the absence of con-sistent genitourinary symptoms or systemic signs of infection (such as fever or change in hemodynamic status). A retrospec-
tive review of 80 patients in a nursing home who fell on their 
way to or back from a bathroom reported that 39 (48%) of these had pyuria and bacteriuria and were diagnosed as UTI [102]. Whether these patients had symptoms of urgency or frequency that contributed to a fall on the way to the toilet is not documented. In a more recent cohort study of suspected UTI in nursing home residents, only 9 of 45 (20%) fall episodes occurred in residents with bacteriuria and pyuria present—the remaining 80% had no bacteriuria and pyuria [103]. These studies suggest that most older residents who fall do not have ASB and falls should not immediately trigger suspicion for UTI; 
other causes are much more likely. Bacteriuria is usually unre-
lated and simply a confounding factor. Neither of these studies directly addresses whether antimicrobial therapy of bacteriuria in residents who have had a fall and do not have genitourinary symptoms or systemic signs of infection modifies adverse out-comes such as sepsis or death, so the evidence base is rated as low quality. However, taken together with evidence that the treatment of ASB in patients without minimal criteria for UTI is not associated with any demonstrable benefits and antimicro-
bials have an important risk of harm, the panel believed that the 
adverse consequences of antimicrobial therapy almost certainly outweigh any desirable consequences of therapy in patients who have fallen and have ASB. In patients who fall and have fever or hemodynamic instability, careful evaluation to identify a site of infection is warranted.
Rationale
We make a strong recommendation because there is high cer -
tainty for harm and low certainty of any benefit from treatment of ASB in older adults. Current evidence does not suggest a causal relationship between bacteriuria and presentations with-out classic localizing UTI symptoms, such as changes in mental 
status or falls. Treatment of ASB in patients with delirium has 
not been shown to have any beneficial impact in clinical out-comes compared to no treatment, including reducing severity or duration of delirium and reducing risk of sepsis, death, or hospitalizations (all low or very low certainty). There is high certainty that antimicrobials cause harm. Treatment probably increases the risk of antibiotic-associated diarrhea, including CDI, and increases the risk of antimicrobial resistance for the individual patient, the institution, and the community [87, 88, 
100].
Values and Preferences
This recommendation places a high value on avoiding adverse outcomes of antimicrobial therapy in the functionally impaired older individual in the absence of evidence that such treatment is beneficial.
Research Needs
Since bacteriuria is often detected and treated in patients with delirium or falls, further studies—ideally randomized—to eval-uate the risks and benefits of antimicrobial treatment and deter -
mine if there is any improvement in mental status, frequency of Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article/68/10/e83/5407612 by MUSC Library user on 12 November 2025

e96 • cid  2019:68 (15 May) • Nicolle et alrepeat falls, or benefits in nonlocalizing clinical signs and symp-
toms, should be undertaken.
VI. Should Patients With Diabetes Be Screened or Treated for ASB?
Recommendation
 1. In patients with diabetes, we recommend against screening 
for or treating ASB (strong recommendation, moderate-qual-ity evidence). Remarks: The recommendation for nontreat-
ment of men is inferred from observations in studies which have primarily enrolled women.
Evidence Summary
In the 2005 IDSA ASB guideline [6], there was a recommenda-tion against screening for or treatment of ASB in people with diabetes. The updated literature review looked for RCTs that compared antimicrobial therapy to no antimicrobial therapy in patients with ASB and diabetes. We did not identify any new 
studies to inform this recommendation.
The previous recommendation against treating women with 
diabetes who had ASB was based on 1 RCT [22] and 2 prospec-
tive cohort studies [104, 105]. The randomized trial compared 
antimicrobial therapy or no therapy for women with diabetes and ASB, and the prospective cohort studies compared out-comes among patients initially with and without ASB. In the 
randomized trial, antimicrobial treatment of ASB (which was 
blinded for the first 6 weeks, and unblinded for the remainder of the 36-month study) did not lead to a difference in rates of symp-tomatic UTI (40% vs 42% over the entire study period). Rates of pyelonephritis were also not significantly different between the antimicrobial and placebo groups (0.13 vs 0.28 per 1000 patient-days; RR, 2.13 [95% CI, .81–5.62]). Focusing specifi-cally on the 6-week blinded portion of the study, pyelonephritis was numerically more common in the antimicrobial-treated 
group compared to the placebo group (8% vs 2%; P &#x003D; 
.20). Antimicrobial-associated diarrhea and CDI were not re-ported, although treatment-related adverse effects were more common in the antimicrobial group (18% vs 6%; P &#x003D; .05). Antimicrobial use for symptomatic UTI, prophylaxis, or other infections was significantly more common in the treat-ment group. These subjects received nearly 5 times more days of antimicrobial therapy than the control group. In the prospec-tive cohort studies [104–106], there were no between-group differences in the outcomes of symptomatic UTI, progression to diabetic complications, and mortality. Among the prespec-ified subgroups of interest (gender, type 1 vs type 2 diabetes, and poorly controlled vs well-controlled diabetes) there was no 
evidence to inform specific recommendations.
Rationale
Antimicrobials may not reduce the risk of symptomatic urinary 
infection, including pyelonephritis in people with diabetes and ASB. Men with diabetes were included in only 1 cohort study and outcomes were similar. There is high-quality evidence that antimicrobials increase the risk of adverse effects. Based on the lack of demonstrated benefit and the possible harms that occur with additional antimicrobial use, we recommend against screening for or treating ASB in persons with diabetes.
Research Needs
There is a subgroup of diabetic women who experience a high frequency of recurrent symptomatic UTI [22]. Further studies to characterize these high-risk women and describe predictors and outcomes of ASB and efficacy of antimicrobial treatment would be warranted. Randomized trials of treatment or non-
treatment of ASB in diabetic men are needed.
VII. Should Patients Who Have Received a Kidney Transplant Be Screened 
or Treated for ASB?
Recommendation
 1. In renal transplant recipients who had the renal transplant 
surgery >1 month prior, we recommend against screening 
for or treating ASB (strong recommendation, high-quality ev-idence ). Remarks: There is insufficient evidence to inform 
a recommendation for or against screening or treatment of 
ASB within the first month following renal transplantation.
Evidence Summary
ASB is common following renal transplantation, and symp-
tomatic UTI is the most frequent infection identified in these patients [107, 108]. Unique outcomes of concern potentially 
attributable to UTI include graft loss, acute graft rejection, and impaired long-term graft function. The impact of UTI 
may be more severe in the immediate posttransplant period 
(ie, within the first month), when patients are at highest risk for infectious complications because of exposures to new and more intensive immunosuppressive therapy, indwelling uro-logic devices, and urologic interventions. Prophylactic anti-microbial therapy, usually TMP-SMX, is routinely used for the prevention of Pneumocystis jirovecii  pneumonia during the 
initial 6 months following renal transplant. TMP-SMX is also probably effective in decreasing the frequency of both symp-tomatic UTI and ASB [109]. However, evolution of antimicro-bial resistance to TMP-SMX in Enterobacteriaceae may limit the efficacy of TMP-SMX prophylaxis for prevention of UTI [110].
Renal transplant patients with ASB have an increased fre-
quency of symptomatic UTI, including pyelonephritis [16, 110–112]. Risk factors for acquisition of ASB are similar to those described for symptomatic UTI [112–114]. These in-clude female sex, comorbidities, urologic variables, and some immunosuppressive therapies. Retrospective studies, most of which do not differentiate ASB and symptomatic UTI, have reported associations of early, but not late, graft pyelonephritis Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article/68/10/e83/5407612 by MUSC Library user on 12 November 2025

IDSA 2019 Clinical Practice Guideline for the Management of Asymptomatic Bacteriuria • cid  2019:68 (15 May) • e97with graft loss [115–118], pyelonephritis with decreased long-
term creatinine clearance [117, 119], and late UTI with graft  
loss [120]. Other studies report no adverse outcomes attribut-able to UTI for either early [121] or long-term [111, 121–123] 
graft survival or renal function. A prospective study in chil-
dren (≤18 years) with a renal transplant reported that 39% 
had at least 1 febrile UTI and, while graft function worsened during the febrile episode, there were no differences in graft  function at 2 years for those with and those without febrile infection [124].
A retrospective review of 189 renal transplant recipients 
followed for 36 months in whom bacteriuria was consistently treated with antimicrobials reported that 51% of patients had 1 or more episodes of ASB (19% 1 episode, 24% 2–5 episodes, and 8% >5 episodes) [16]. The prevalence was 23% in the 
immediate posttransplant period, 10%–17% monthly during 
the first year, and 2%–9% in subsequent years. Having ≥ 2 
episodes of ASB was an independent risk factor for acute pyelonephritis, but only 2 of 25 episodes of pyelonephritis could potentially have been prevented by identification and treatment of prior ASB. A prospective study of 209 renal 
transplant recipients followed for 1 year after transplant, 
with urine routinely screened with culture every 3 days for the first 2 weeks, weekly to 1 month, and at each outpatient follow-up visit, reported that 53% of subjects had at least 1 positive urine culture; 53% of the bacteriuric episodes were considered asymptomatic, and 40% of patients had at least 1 episode of ASB [112]. More than one-half of positive cul-tures were identified in the first month after transplantation, when screening was most frequent. All episodes of bacteri-uria were treated with antimicrobials. Recurrent ASB was an 
independent risk factor for symptomatic infection, but only 
21 of 152 (14%) symptomatic episodes were preceded by bac-teriuria with the same causative organism. ASB was not asso-ciated with poorer graft function.
Two retrospective comparative cohort studies report no 
association of untreated ASB with poorer outcomes in renal transplant recipients [125, 126]. El-Amari et al [125] identified 
334 episodes of asymptomatic E. coli or Enterococcus faecalis  
bacteriuria in renal transplant recipients 1 month or more after transplantation; 137 specimens had ≥ 10
5 CFU/mL and, 
of these, 49% were treated with antimicrobials at the attending physician’s discretion. Only 1 untreated patient progressed to symptomatic infection with the same organism. Spontaneous clearance was observed for 38 of 67 (57%) untreated episodes, 
similar to the microbiologic cure of 41 of 70 (59%) episodes 
following antimicrobial treatment. There were no episodes of acute graft rejection observed in either group. Green et al [126] evaluated a single episode of ASB identified in 112 patients from 1 to 12 months after transplantation; 19.6% of patients received antimicrobial treatment for bacteriuria, at the attending physician’s discretion. The primary outcome of hospitalization for UTI or >25% reduction in estimated glo-merular filtration rate at 30 days after documentation of bac-teriuria occurred in 18.2% of treated and 5.6% of untreated patients (OR, 3.78 [95% CI, .9–15]). Other outcomes, in-cluding changes in serum creatinine, graft loss, pyelonephritis, or urosepsis were similar for treated and untreated patients. These retrospective studies are subject to confounding, how-
ever, as physicians would, presumably, be more likely to treat 
patients with a positive urine culture if they were judged to have a poorer clinical status.
Two prospective, randomized, open-label comparative 
trials evaluated treatment or nontreatment of ASB following renal transplant. Moradi et al [127] enrolled 88 patients at least 1 year after transplant, who were then followed for 9–12 months. Patients with Proteus mirabilis  infection were excluded. 
Outcomes of bacteriuric episodes, symptomatic UTI, and renal function were similar between treated and nontreated subjects. 
The report does not describe criteria used for identification of 
symptomatic episodes. Origüen et al [128] enrolled 112 patients with bacteriuria identified ≥2 months following transplant and followed them for up to 24 months. Urine was screened for bacteriuria every 2 weeks for the first 3 months after transplan-tation, monthly to the first year, and every 1–3 months there-
after. Regimens for treatment of recurrent episodes varied for 
reinfection or relapse. Antimicrobials were not given for 49% of episodes of ASB in subjects randomized to treatment, often be-cause antimicrobial resistance limited oral options, while 15% of subjects randomized to no treatment received antimicrobial therapy for other indications that was also effective for the bac-teriuria. Outcomes were analyzed as intention to treat and per protocol. In addition, a post hoc modified per-protocol analysis of subjects who received effective antimicrobial therapy for all episodes of ASB if they experienced only 1 or 2, or for at least 
two-thirds of episodes if they experienced ≥3, was reported. 
The primary outcome of acute pyelonephritis occurred with 
equal frequency in both groups in all analyses. There were also no differences in any of the secondary outcomes of long-term (12–24 months) graft function, all-cause mortality, cumulative incidence of lower UTI, acute graft rejection, CDI, colonization or infection due to multidrug-resistant bacteria, and graft loss by the end of the follow-up period. Only 16 (3.6%) episodes of ASB (5 treated and 11 untreated) were followed by symp-tomatic UTI with the same organism; 6 of these 16 episodes were pyelonephritis. Microbiologic cure occurred in only 51% of subjects who received antimicrobial therapy, while 33% of 
nontreated subjects had spontaneous clearance of bacteriuria. 
Of the 9 episodes of pyelonephritis in subjects in the intention-to-treat analysis, 3 were not preceded by ASB with the same organism, 3 were preceded by bacteriuria with a time interval too short to allow treatment, and 2 were preceded by bacteri-uria recognized over 40 days before pyelonephritis, so a causal link could not be presumed. Thus, no benefits of treatment of Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article/68/10/e83/5407612 by MUSC Library user on 12 November 2025

e98 • cid  2019:68 (15 May) • Nicolle et alASB were identified. This study is also evidence of the limited 
feasibility of consistently identifying and treating all episodes of bacteriuria as a strategy to maintain a sterile urine in renal transplant recipients.
Rationale
Treatment of ASB in renal transplant recipients >1 month after surgery may not prevent pyelonephritis or graft rejection (high-quality evidence) and probably does not improve graft function (moderate-quality evidence). Consistent identification of episodes of ASB in renal transplant patients requires frequent 
screening as ASB commonly recurs. Antimicrobial-resistant 
organisms are common in renal transplant recipients, and a high proportion of resistant organisms causing ASB may not be effectively treated with oral therapy. Treatment of ASB probably promotes reinfection with organisms increasingly resistant to antimicrobials, potentially compromising treatment of sympto-matic UTI, which is also frequent in these patients. There is also 
high-quality evidence that antimicrobial therapy has an impor -
tant risk of adverse effects.
Research Needs
There may be subgroups of transplant recipients at higher risk 
for developing pyelonephritis (indwelling devices, combined transplant). Further evaluation of these patients and whether proactive management of ASB can prevent pyelonephritis is worthy of additional study. In addition, the efficacy and practi-
cality of screening for and treatment of ASB within 1 month of 
transplantation needs to be evaluated given the higher risk for infection and complications from infection in the early post-transplant period.
VIII. Should Patients Who Have Received a Solid Organ Transplant Other 
Than a Renal Transplant Be Screened or Treated for ASB?
Recommendation
 1. In patients with nonrenal SOT, we recommend against 
screening for or treating ASB (strong recommendation, mod -
erate-quality evidence). Values and preferences: This recom-
mendation places a high value on avoidance of antimicrobial 
use so as to limit the acquisition of antimicrobial-resistant organisms or CDI in SOT patients, who are at increased risk for these adverse outcomes. Remarks: In nonrenal SOT recipients, symptomatic UTI is uncommon and adverse con-
sequences of symptomatic UTI are extremely rare; the risk 
of complications from ASB is, therefore, probably negligible.
Evidence Summary
No studies were identified which addressed the question of treatment or nontreatment of ASB in SOT patients other than renal transplant recipients. As with renal transplants, most nonrenal transplant recipients receive prophylactic antimi-crobial therapy to prevent infections for the initial 6 months following transplantation. A prospective registry study reported that the incidence of symptomatic UTI per 1000 patient-days for patients with at least 1 year of follow-up was 0.06 for 1507 liver transplants, 0.07 for 404 heart transplants, and 0.02 for 303 lung transplants, compared with 0.45 for kidney transplants and 0.22 for combined kidney and pancreas transplants [129]. Pyelonephritis accounted for 20% of symptomatic episodes of infection for liver transplant patients, but there were no pyelone-phritis episodes reported for heart or lung transplant recipients. 
ASB was not reported. For liver and heart transplant recipients, 
96% and 90% of episodes occurred in the first 6 months, al-most all of which occurred in the first posttransplant month. After 6 months, rates of genitourinary infection per 1000 days, excluding uncomplicated cystitis and ASB, were kidney 0.05, kidney-pancreas 0.11, liver 0.03, heart 0, and lung 0.04 [130].
Rationale
UTIs are uncommon in nonkidney SOT, and the evidence suggests that serious harms resulting from symptomatic UTIs 
are extremely rare. Any serious adverse consequences of ASB 
in nonrenal transplant recipients would be even more un-common than symptomatic UTIs and are, therefore, almost certainly negligible. Even with the most optimistic assumptions about antimicrobial efficacy, screening and treatment of ASB in nonrenal SOT recipients would impart only negligible benefits (high-quality evidence). Thus, it is reasonable to make a rec-ommendation for SOT patients other than kidney transplant, which is no stronger than that for kidney transplant patients.
IX. Should Patients With Neutropenia Be Screened or Treated for ASB?
Recommendation
 1. In patients with high-risk neutropenia (absolute neutrophil 
count [ANC] <100 cells/mm3, ≥7 days’ duration, following 
cytotoxic chemotherapy) we make no recommendation for or against screening for treatment of ASB (knowledge gap). Remarks: For patients with high-risk neutropenia (ANC <100 cells/mm
3, ≥7 days following cytotoxic chemotherapy) 
managed with current standards of care, including prophy-lactic antimicrobial therapy and prompt initiation of antimi-crobial therapy when febrile illness occurs, it is unclear how frequently ASB occurs and how often it progresses to symp-tomatic UTI. Patients with low-risk neutropenia (>100 cells/mm
3, ≤7 days, clinically stable) have only a very small risk 
of infection, and there is no evidence to suggest that, in this population, ASB has greater risk than for nonneutropenic populations.
Evidence Summary
Early prospective studies undertaken before antimicrobial pro-phylaxis became a standard of care for patients with high-risk neutropenia (≥7 days duration, ≤100 cells/mm
3, following cy-
totoxic chemotherapy) reported that gram-negative organisms Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article/68/10/e83/5407612 by MUSC Library user on 12 November 2025

IDSA 2019 Clinical Practice Guideline for the Management of Asymptomatic Bacteriuria • cid  2019:68 (15 May) • e99initially isolated from the urine and subsequently isolated from 
bacteremic episodes were also usually present as colonizers in the gut prior to the episode of bacteremia [131, 132]. However, 
1 study [131] reported that 2 neutropenic patients with P.  m i r a -
bilis initially isolated only from urine culture subsequently de-
veloped P . mirabilis  bacteremia, and 3 patients with Klebsiella 
pneumoniae  isolated only in the urine became bacteremic with 
a phenotypically similar strain. This suggests ASB may be a source for bacteremia in some neutropenic patients. Current management for patients with high-risk neutropenia typically includes prophylactic antimicrobial therapy, which also usually resolves bacteriuria, when present [133]. These patients are also monitored closely, and broad-spectrum antimicrobial therapy is initiated promptly when a febrile episode occurs. A recent retrospective review of patients admitted to hospital with fe-
brile neutropenia (ANC ≤1500 cells/mm
3) occurring within 4 
weeks of chemotherapy reported that only 2.8% had UTI (2.9% 
of those with ANC ≤100 cells/mm3), and only 1 of 109 patients 
had bacteremia from a urinary source [134].
Rationale
With current management strategies for high-risk neutropenic patients, the urinary tract is an infrequent source for bacteremia. While no studies specifically address this question, screening for bacteriuria with specific antimicrobial treatment, if present, seems unlikely to provide important additional benefits when 
current standard of care for these patients is followed. Patients 
with low-risk neutropenia (<7 days, clinically stable, ANC >100 cells/mm
3) have a lower risk of infection and are assumed to 
have risks similar to nonneutropenic populations.
Research Needs
Further evaluation of the frequency of ASB and severity of UTI for both high-risk and low-risk patients is necessary. These studies should include patients with neutropenia attributable to causes other than chemotherapy, and patients with indwelling bladder catheters.
X. Should ASB Be Screened for or Treated in Individuals With Impaired 
Voiding Following SCI?
Recommendation
 1. In patients with SCI, we recommend against screening for or 
treating ASB (strong recommendation, low-quality evidence). 
Remarks: Clinical signs and symptoms of UTI experienced by patients with SCI may differ from the classic genitourinary symptoms experienced by patients with normal sensation. 
The atypical presentation of UTI in these patients should be 
considered in making decisions with respect to treatment or nontreatment of bacteriuria.
Evidence Summary
Subjects with SCI have a high prevalence of bacteriuria and a high incidence of UTI [15, 26]. Treatment of ASB in studies enrolling primarily males with SCI and without indwelling 
catheters is usually followed by early recurrence of bacteriuria 
after antimicrobial therapy, and reinfecting strains are more likely to be resistant to antimicrobials [135]. In patients with recent onset of SCI, symptomatic UTI infrequently followed ASB and was easily treated when it occurred [136]. Studies which evaluated antimicrobial treatment or prophylaxis, com-pared with placebo or no treatment, enrolled patients managed with intermittent catheterization and observed no differences in rates of symptomatic UTI between treatment groups [137, 138]. The evidence is limited by the small numbers of patients 
enrolled, and relatively short durations of follow-up. However, 
review articles [139, 140] and consensus guidelines [141], as 
well as the 2005 IDSA ASB Guideline Committee [6] and 2009 IDSA Catheter-Acquired UTI Guideline Committee [18], con-cluded that ASB should not be screened for or treated in SCI patients. Guidelines of the European Association of Urology for urological infections also conclude that screening for and treat-
ment of ASB in patients with SCI are not recommended [142].
Some evidence suggests ASB might be protective in these 
patients, and treatment of ASB may be associated with an 
increased risk of symptomatic UTI [143]. The inoculation of a nonpathogenic E. coli ASB strain (E. coli 823972/HU2117) in 
the lower urinary tract of patients with impaired voiding has been evaluated to mimic the potential protective effect of spon-taneously developed ASB [144]. The inoculation of this E. coli strain in selected SCI patients with incomplete bladder empty-
ing was generally safe and without side effects [144–147]. Two 
RCTs in a small number of patients with neurogenic bladders (20 and 27 patients, respectively) reported that this approach protected against symptomatic UTI [148, 149]. However, the 
small numbers of subjects, methodological limitations, and limited current feasibility of establishing and maintaining bacteriuria means the role of bacterial interference to prevent symptomatic UTI in the SCI population remains undefined. These studies do, however, support the concept of a protective 
effect of ASB and the conclusion that nontreatment of sponta-
neously developed long-term E. coli ASB in patients with SCI and neurogenic bladder is appropriate.
Patients with neurogenic bladder, such as those with SCI, 
are often bacteriuric and have genitourinary symptoms that might be compatible with symptomatic UTI, posing a diagnos-tic problem for clinicians. In contrast to patients with normal sensation, many patients with SCI and symptomatic UTI do not present with classic symptoms of UTI, such as dysuria, and may have symptoms not considered consistent with a presentation for UTI in other populations. This difficulty in ascertainment of the symptoms in a bacteriuric SCI patient is the likely reason for treatment of many patients with ASB [150]. Signs and symp-
toms that should be considered when assessing SCI patients for 
UTI are defined in the International Spinal Cord Injury UTI Basic Data Set, and include fever, malaise, lethargy or sense of Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article/68/10/e83/5407612 by MUSC Library user on 12 November 2025

e100 • cid  2019:68 (15 May) • Nicolle et alunease, or new or worsening urinary incontinence or leaking 
around the catheter, spasticity, cloudy urine, malodorous urine, back pain, bladder pain, dysuria, and/or autonomic dysreflexia [151]. In a prospective study of individuals with SCI, subjects were better at predicting when they did not have a UTI than 
when they did have a UTI (defined as bacteriuria with a colony 
count of at least 10
5 CFU/mL and at least 1 sign or symptom of 
UTI) [152]. It is reasonable to conclude, therefore, that a SCI patient who presents with recent onset or change in the signs or symptoms described above, in the setting of bacteriuria and pyuria and with no other obvious cause for the signs and/or 
symptoms, may have a symptomatic UTI and should be offered 
treatment.
Rationale
The efficacy of antimicrobial therapy for patients with ASB and SCI is uncertain (low-quality evidence). Some preliminary ev-idence suggests that ASB may be protective in people with SCI 
and impaired voiding. There is also high-quality evidence that 
antimicrobials cause harm through adverse effects and costs, as well as increasing the risk for antimicrobial-resistant infections in the individual and the community.
Research Needs
ASB is associated with variable degrees of pyuria, so the validity of conventional urinalysis with dipstick is uncertain to interpret in SCI patients. There is a need for novel biomarkers to differ -
entiate symptomatic UTI and ASB. Some studies have shown promising early results using urinary concentrations of the 
acute phase reactant IL-6, but more evidence is needed before 
this or other biomarkers can be routinely adopted in clinical settings [153]. Further studies in SCI patients managed with intermittent or indwelling catheterization are needed to evalu-ate the significance of nonspecific symptoms, including incon-tinence and cloudy and malodorous urine, and the outcomes with early or delayed antimicrobial therapy.
XI. Should Patients With an Indwelling Urethral Catheter Be Screened or 
Treated for ASB?
Recommendations
 1. In patients with a short-term indwelling urethral catheter 
(<30 days), we recommend against screening for or treat-
ing ASB (strong recommendation, low-quality evidence). Remarks: Considerations are likely to be similar for patients with indwelling suprapubic catheters, and it is reasonable to 
manage these patients similar to patients with indwelling 
urethral catheters, for both short-term and long-term supra-pubic catheterization.
 2. In patients with indwelling catheters, we make no recom-
mendation for or against screening for and treating ASB at the time of catheter removal (knowledge gap). Remarks: Antimicrobial prophylaxis given at the time of catheter removal may confer a benefit for prevention of symptomatic UTI for some patients. The evidence to support this obser -
vation is largely from studies enrolling surgical patients who receive prophylactic antimicrobials at the time of short-term catheter removal, generally without screening to determine if ASB is present. It is unclear whether or not the benefit is greater in patients with ASB.
 3. In patients with long-term indwelling catheters, we recom-
mend against screening for or treating ASB (strong recom -
mendation, moderate-quality evidence).
Evidence Summary
Bacteriuria With Short-term Catheters
The universal formation of biofilm along the indwelling cath-eter means all patients ultimately develop bacteriuria if an indwelling catheter remains in situ. Acquisition of bacteriuria is 3%–5% per catheter day; antimicrobial therapy may delay but not prevent onset [6]. Once bacteriuria is established in a cath-
eterized urinary tract, antimicrobials can temporarily suppress 
the bacteriuria, but recurrence with the same or different spe-cies, often with organisms of increased antimicrobial resistance, occurs universally. Many individuals with short-term catheters (in place for <30 days) do not develop bacteriuria because the catheter is removed prior to acquisition of bacteriuria. In addi-tion, 60%–80% of acute care patients with short-term indwell-
ing catheters receive an antimicrobial course for an indication 
other than bacteriuria, and this may delay the onset of bacteri-uria and modify the species and resistance profile of organisms isolated [ 154, 155].
For patients who develop bacteriuria, symptomatic UTI is in-
frequent. Tambyah et al [154] reported that 235 of 1497 (14.9%) evaluable newly catheterized patients developed bacteriuria (defined as ≥10
3 CFU/mL) at a mean of 6.4 ± 6.1 days. Only 15 
of the 194 (7.7%) patients with bacteriuria who could be inter -
viewed reported subjective symptoms; moreover, the prevalence of symptoms referable to the urinary tract, including fever, did not differ for patients with or without bacteriuria. Only 1 ep-
isode of bacteremia was considered probably attributable to 
bacteriuria in 1497 newly catheterized patients. Srinivasan et al [156], in a prospective randomized trial comparing silver coated with uncoated silicone catheters, enrolled 3036 patients with indwelling catheters in situ for ≥48 hours. The study did not differentiate ASB and symptomatic UTI. There were 334 (11%) UTIs, 16 with bacteremia (0.5% of catheters; 4.8% of bac-teriuric patients). A retrospective cohort study of 444 episodes of catheter-associated bacteriuria in 308 patients reported 128 (41.6%) had catheter-associated UTI (CAUTI) and 180 (58.4%) had ASB [157]. Only 3 episodes of bacteremia (0.7% of bacte-riuric subjects) were directly attributed to bacteriuria. In this cohort, >90% of patients received antimicrobials within 30 days 
of the urine culture for both urinary and nonurinary indica-
tions, and administration of antimicrobials specifically to treat Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article/68/10/e83/5407612 by MUSC Library user on 12 November 2025

IDSA 2019 Clinical Practice Guideline for the Management of Asymptomatic Bacteriuria • cid  2019:68 (15 May) • e101urinary organisms did not appear to reduce mortality or the 
30-day risk of bacteremia from any source.
Whether or not the presence of CAUTI or ASB increases the 
risk of mortality is controversial. Studies that have reported an association have generally not adjusted for known and impor -
tant confounders. In a nested case-control study of 3281 French intensive care unit (ICU) patients with an indwelling catheter, 9% of whom developed at least 1 episode of bacteriuria (asymp-tomatic or symptomatic), crude hospital mortality was 43% with and 32% without bacteriuria, respectively, and crude ICU mor -
tality was 30% and 25%, respectively [158]. Following matching and adjustment, UTI was no longer associated with mortality. A systematic review of studies of CAUTI, mortality, and length of stay in critically ill patients reported that CAUTI was associ-ated with significantly increased mortality and length of stay in 
unmatched studies, but after adjustment for other prognostic 
factors there was no association of mortality with UTI [159].
A prospective randomized clinical trial compared antimi-
crobial treatment together with catheter change to no antimi-crobials or catheter change in 60 ICU patients with ASB [160]. There were no differences in outcomes of mortality, recurrent 
bacteriuria, or duration of mechanical ventilation between the 
2 groups. Three patients in each group developed urosepsis. While the focus of this guideline is bacterial infection, a pro-spective randomized comparative trial in hospitalized patients with asymptomatic candiduria, 56% of whom had indwelling catheters, reported no differences in outcomes between treated and untreated patients in the catheterized subgroup [161].
A Cochrane review published in 2013 addressed the question of 
whether antimicrobial prophylaxis given during short-term uri-nary catheter usage confers clinical benefits [162]. The main find-
ing was that bacteriuria was reduced by antimicrobial prophylaxis 
during catheterization, but the outcome measures and study pop-ulations were heterogeneous. In 5 of 6 studies, the outcome mea-sured was ASB, and 4 of these studies were in surgical patients.
Rationale
Most patients with short-term indwelling catheters do not acquire bacteriuria, and short-term catheter-associated bacte-riuria does not appear to increase the risk for sepsis or death. When bacteriuria occurs, it infrequently results in symptomatic infection or bacteremia. Whether or not antimicrobials for ASB are effective in preventing symptomatic UTI, sepsis, or death is uncertain. In the acute care hospital setting, the risk of CDI is high; thus, avoiding antimicrobials is particularly important in 
hospitalized patients. Patients with short-term catheters are also 
at high risk for nosocomial infections with antimicrobial-resis-tant organisms, so avoiding antimicrobials is important to the individual and the community.
Bacteriuria at Catheter Removal
No additional clinical trials that screened for ASB at the time of catheter removal and, if present, randomized patients to treatment or no treatment, were published since 2005. One RCT in women, published in 1991 [163], addressed this topic and was included in prior guidelines [6, 18]. Seven of 42 (17%) 
women randomized to no treatment developed symptomatic 
UTI within 14 days, while 15 (36%) had spontaneous clear -
ance of bacteriuria during this period. Thus, selected women 
in whom bacteriuria persists after catheter removal may be at increased short-term risk for symptomatic UTI. However, the generalizability of these observations to the current co-hort of women with short-term indwelling catheters is un-clear, as women in this study were enrolled only if there was a negative urine culture at catheter insertion, no antimicrobial therapy while the catheter remained in situ, and bacteriuria 
documented at catheter removal and persisting 48 hours after 
catheter removal. Many of these women were also catheterized for gynecologic procedures, and current recommendations for limiting indwelling catheter use means these procedures would now likely be managed without an indwelling catheter.
Whether antimicrobial treatment at the time of removal of a 
short-term urinary catheter prevents subsequent symptomatic 
UTI has been addressed in a meta-analysis [164]. The analy-
sis included 6 studies, in addition to the study described above [163]; 5 of these enrolled only surgical patients. These studies initiated antimicrobial therapy shortly before catheter removal, irrespective of whether ASB was present or not. Six of the stud-ies were RCTs. In the meta-analysis, antimicrobial treatment at the time of catheter removal reduced the risk of symptomatic UTI in the follow-up period, which ranged from 1 to 6 weeks (RD, –65/1000 [95% CI, –86 to –33]; low quality). The studies 
were heterogeneous in design and, in general, had a high risk of 
selection and attrition bias.
Rationale
We make a strong recommendation because there is very low certainty of any benefit and high-quality evidence of harm. There are no studies generalizable to current practice specifi-cally addressing the question of whether screening for or treat-ing ASB at the time of catheter removal confers benefits or 
results in adverse outcomes. While selected patient groups, such 
as patients with recent surgery for urinary tract reconstruc-
tion, may possibly benefit from treatment of ASB at catheter 
removal, the extent of benefit, association with bacteriuria, and 
specific patient groups who may benefit is uncertain. While the benefits of antimicrobial therapy at catheter removal are uncer -
tain, there is high-quality evidence that antimicrobials cause harm including adverse effects and increasing costs, as well as increasing the risk of antimicrobial-resistant infections in the individual and the community.
Chronic Indwelling Catheters
Individuals with chronic indwelling catheters are, gener -
ally, always bacteriuric, usually with a polymicrobial flora Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article/68/10/e83/5407612 by MUSC Library user on 12 November 2025

e102 • cid  2019:68 (15 May) • Nicolle et al[19]. Residents of long-term care facilities who have chronic 
indwelling catheters have an increased frequency of febrile 
UTI compared with bacteriuric residents without catheters 
[165, 166]. CAUTI is the source of more than half of all epi-
sodes of bacteremia in long-term care residents, while only 5%–10% of residents have indwelling catheters [167]. Kunin et 
al [168] reported increased mortality in residents with chronic 
indwelling catheters, but when adjusted for other differences between catheterized and noncatheterized long-term care fa-cility residents, the CI included no effect. In a subsequent larger 
prospective study among 1540 residents [166], he reported a 
significant independent association of chronic urinary catheter use with mortality, and a stepwise increase in mortality with duration of catheterization. However, we did not identify any 
evidence that antimicrobial treatment of bacteriuria in per -
sons with long-term indwelling catheters can reduce the risk 
of death.
A prospective cohort study of prophylaxis to prevent ASB 
and UTI in patients with long-term indwelling catheters re-
ported no benefits [169]. Studies also consistently report 
that treatment of subjects with ASB and chronic catheters is 
followed by rapid emergence of antimicrobial resistance in urinary strains [169, 170]. A prospective, randomized com-
parative trial [ 23] in residents of long-term care facilities com-
pared 17 patients who received a 10-day course of cephalexin monohydrate, repeated whenever susceptible bacteria were isolated (160 courses), and 18 control patients who received no antimicrobials for bacteriuria. There were no differences be-tween the groups in the incidence or prevalence of bacteriuria, number of bacterial strains isolated, incidence of febrile days, 
or incidence of catheter obstruction. For subjects who received 
the antimicrobial, fever occurred with similar frequency when receiving or not receiving cephalexin, and reinfection with cephalexin-resistant bacteria was more frequent. In a recent randomized study of a bundle of interventions implemented with the goal to decrease screening and treatment of ASB in catheterized subjects, the intervention arm was associated with a substantial decrease in screening and treatment for ASB in long-term care patients, and no increase in symptomatic UTI was observed [34].
Rationale
Whether there is a benefit of antimicrobial therapy for ASB while a catheter remains in situ is uncertain (low-quality ev-idence), and there is high-quality evidence of harm with increased antimicrobial resistance. A positive urine culture in an asymptomatic subject with an indwelling catheter drives in-
appropriate antimicrobial treatment of ASB, so screening with urine cultures in catheterized patients or obtaining urine cul-
tures for nonspecific symptoms should be discouraged.
Research Needs
Further studies to determine which patients are at increased risk of bacteremia attributable to an indwelling catheter may inform clinical trials addressing the treatment of catheter-asso-ciated ASB for these high-risk populations. Exploration of early signs, symptoms, or biomarkers that may predict progression 
from ASB to CAUTI or bacteremia in catheterized patients is 
needed. Further studies, enrolling both medical and surgical patients, are needed to identify which patients, if any, benefit from antimicrobial prophylaxis or treatment of established ASB at the time of catheter removal.
XII. Should Patients Undergoing Elective Nonurological Surgery Be 
Screened and Treated for ASB?
Recommendation
 1. In patients undergoing elective nonurologic surgery, we rec-
ommend against screening for or treating ASB (strong recom -
mendation, low-quality evidence).
Evidence Summary
Antimicrobial therapy for patients with ASB undergoing 
nonurologic surgery was not addressed in the previous IDSA ASB guideline. Preoperative ASB has been identified as a risk factor for postoperative complications, including deep and su-perficial surgical-site infections [171–173], and preoperative 
testing for pyuria and bacteriuria has been a relatively common 
practice in some settings for at least 30 years [174]. One major clinical concern is prosthetic infection developing in ortho-pedic patients. We identified 3 studies that informed the rec-ommendation for these patients [175–177] (Figure 2). One clinical trial randomized patients with ASB undergoing total hip arthroplasty to antimicrobial therapy or no therapy [177]. There were 2 cohort studies—1 exclusive to orthopedic surgery [175], and the other enrolling orthopedic, cardiac, and vascular surgery patients [176].
The 3 studies combined screened 3167 preoperative patients 
for ASB, of which 403 (12.7%) had ASB. Approximately half of 
the patients received antimicrobials targeting the ASB in ad-
dition to perioperative prophylaxis (n &#x003D; 191 [47%]). 
Many patients in these studies received preoperative antimi-crobial prophylaxis of varying dose, duration, and spectrum of activity, based on institutional and provider practices. None of these studies reported the association between postoperative outcomes and use of standard or expanded perioperative pro-phylaxis active against the preoperative ASB organism, inde-pendent of the targeted ASB therapy. Sousa et al [175] reported that 5 patients with ASB who developed postoperative UTI did 
not receive targeted ASB treatment but did receive perioperative Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article/68/10/e83/5407612 by MUSC Library user on 12 November 2025

IDSA 2019 Clinical Practice Guideline for the Management of Asymptomatic Bacteriuria • cid  2019:68 (15 May) • e103prophylaxis active against the preoperative ASB strains. 
However, there is insufficient evidence to address whether the common strategy of expanding perioperative prophylaxis to in-clude coverage of the ASB organism has any benefit.
The baseline risk of symptomatic UTI in patients who did 
not receive antimicrobial treatment for ASB was approxi-mately 36 per 1000, compared with 140 per 1000 for surgical site infection and 27 per 1000 for prosthetic joint infection. There was very low certainty for an effect of treatment of ASB on all outcomes. Most of the information came from observa-tional studies at high risk for confounding and detection bias, and the CIs included both important benefit and harm. None of the included studies assessed duration of hospitalization, pyelonephritis and/or urosepsis, or antimicrobial-associated diarrhea and CDI. One reported the incidence of surgical site 
infections including prosthetic joint infections, 2 reported 
only prosthetic joint infections, and 2 reported the incidence of postoperative symptomatic UTI. Patients with orthopedic implant infections postoperatively had different pathogens isolated from the surgical infection compared to the preop-erative urine [175, 176], suggesting a source other than the 
urine.
Rationale
It is very uncertain whether antimicrobial treatment for ASB in patients undergoing nonurologic surgery, other than standard perioperative prophylaxis, has any important benefits. The magnitude of harm, which probably varies depending on the antimicrobial used, is very uncertain; however, there is high 
certainty that any antimicrobial increases the risk of harm. 
Screening for and treating ASB increases costs, and probably contributes to CDI, adverse drug effects, and antimicrobial resistance at an individual and health system level. The issue of whether perioperative antimicrobials should be adjusted to cover the urinary pathogen in patients undergoing ortho-
pedic implants is not well addressed in the literature. The 
panel did not want to make a recommendation for or against this common practice because the magnitudes of benefits and harms are so uncertain.
Research Needs
Well-designed prospective, randomized trials that evaluate adjusting surgical prophylaxis regimens to ensure activity against ASB are needed. In addition, clinical trials evaluating screening and treatment of ASB in patients, other than those receiving orthopedic implants, are necessary.
XIII. Should Patients Undergoing Endourological Procedures Be Screened 
or Treated for ASB?
Recommendations
 1. In patients who will undergo endoscopic urologic pro-
cedures associated with mucosal trauma, we recommend 
screening for and treating ASB prior to surgery (strong recommendation, moderate-quality evidence). Values and 
preferences:  This recommendation places a high value on 
the avoidance of the serious postoperative complication of sepsis, which is a substantial risk for patients undergoing invasive endourologic procedures in the presence of bac-teriuria. Remarks: In individuals with bacteriuria, these 
are procedures in a heavily contaminated surgical field. High-quality evidence for other surgical procedures con-sistently shows that preoperative antimicrobial treatment Figure 2. A, Risk of prosthetic joint infection in patients treated vs not treated for asymptomatic bacteriuria in patients undergoing orthopedic surgery. B, Risk of symp-
tomatic urinary tract infection in the postoperative period in patients treated vs not treated for asymptomatic bacteriuria in patients undergoing orthopedic surgery. 
Abbreviations: CI, confidence interval; M-H, Mantel-Haenszel.Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article/68/10/e83/5407612 by MUSC Library user on 12 November 2025

e104 • cid  2019:68 (15 May) • Nicolle et alor prophylaxis for contaminated or clean-contaminated 
procedures confers important benefits.
 2. In patients who will undergo endoscopic urologic proce-
dures, we suggest that a urine culture be obtained prior to the procedure and targeted antimicrobial therapy prescribed, 
rather than empiric therapy (weak recommendation, very 
low-quality evidence).
 3. In patients with ASB who will undergo a urologic proce-
dure, we suggest short course (1 or 2 doses), rather than more prolonged antimicrobial therapy (weak recommenda -
tion, low-quality evidence). Remarks: Antimicrobial therapy 
should be initiated 30–60 minutes before the procedure.
Evidence Summary
ASB is a well-established risk factor for development of fe-brile UTI after urological procedures, but the risk is highly dependent on the type of procedure performed [178, 179]. 
The risk for infectious complications is considered high in all 
procedures with a risk of breaching the mucosal lining (eg, 
transurethral surgery of the prostate [TURP] or the bladder, ureteroscopy including lithotripsy, percutaneous stone sur -
gery). Diagnostic or other urological procedures that do not breach the mucosal lining (eg, uncomplicated catheter re-moval/exchange, diagnostic cystoscopy, cystoscopy including removing of internal ureteric stents) are considered low risk for infectious complications. Studies comparing different 
approaches to reduce postsurgical infection rates, including 
antimicrobial prophylaxis, often need to enroll subjects under -
going “high-volume” procedures to facilitate adequate partici-pant recruitment numbers. In urology, TURP is a high-volume procedure and has been the “model” for randomized trials; indirect evidence from TURP must then be applied to proce-dures performed less frequently. For diagnostic, nontraumatic procedures, randomized studies of outpatient cystoscopy have generally been the standard for other, less frequent nontrau-
matic endoscopic procedures [180].
Treatment of ASB Prior to Endourological Procedures
Two RCTs [181, 182] and 2 prospective nonrandomized studies 
[183, 184] enrolling a total of 570 patients with ASB, all pub-
lished prior to the 2005 guideline, compared the effect of anti-
microbial treatment to no treatment before TURP or bladder tumor resection (TURBT). In a trial comparing the effect of short-course cefotaxime compared to no treatment prior to TURP in 192 patients [181], 43% in the treatment and 40% in the control groups had preoperative bacteriuria (≥10
7 CFU/L). 
For patients with ASB, bacteriuria was eliminated in 67% and 30%, respectively (P < .02) after 6 weeks. None of the 26 patients in the cefotaxime group and 3 of the 23 (13%) patients in the control group developed postoperative upper UTI. The second 
randomized trial compared the efficacy of short (started the 
day prior to operation and continued until the catheter was removed) or more prolonged (continued for 5 days after the catheter was removed) courses of perioperative ciprofloxacin or no antimicrobial treatment in patients undergoing TURP [182]. Preoperative bacteriuria (≥10
7 CFU/L) was present in 46 of 76 
(61%) patients who received a short course, 34 of 75 (45%) re-ceiving a prolonged course, and 38 of 71 (54%) in the no treat-ment group. ASB was eliminated postoperatively in 65.2%, 91.2% (significant intergroup difference: P &#x003D; .012), 
and 7.9%, respectively. There were no cases of postoperative 
bacteremia, and only 1 patient with postoperative upper UTI in each of the ciprofloxacin groups. Four patients developed bacteremia and 4 patients had upper UTI in the control group (5.6%, P &#x003D; .02 for bacteremia and 5.6%, P &#x003D; 
.004 for bacteremia and upper UTI, compared with ciproflox-acin). An open prospective study enrolled bacteriuric patients prior to transurethral procedures and compared the effect of antimicrobial treatment (different regimens based on bacterial susceptibility, n &#x003D; 180) to no treatment (n &#x003D; 
111) [183]. There were no episodes of bacteremia identified in 
patients who received appropriate antimicrobials 2–12 hours before operation, while 7 patients (6.15%) not receiving ap-propriate antimicrobials developed bacteremia. Another pro-spective comparative trial [ 184] reported that postoperative 
bacteremia and fever in patients with treated or untreated pre-
operative ASB prior to transurethral operations occurred in 8 
of 25 (32%) patients who did not receive appropriate antimicro-bials, and 10 of 87 (11.5%) patients who received appropriate antimicrobials. No patient developed postoperative septicemia.
Antimicrobial Regimens Prior to Traumatic Endourological Surgery
Six studies [185–190] compared different perioperative ASB treatment regimens and durations. Two of these [189, 190] were 
published after the previous guideline. Two early RCTs com-pared the efficacy of perioperative antimicrobial treatment to methenamine hippurate treatment. Of 79 patients with ASB 
(≥10
5 CFU/mL) prior to TURP , 37 patients were randomized to 
treatment preoperatively and for 10 days postoperatively with 
cefazolin-cephalexin, and 42 randomized to receive methenam-ine hippurate [185]. Two (5.4%) patients receiving antimicro-bials developed chills postoperatively without serious clinical illness, while 7 patients (16.7%) receiving methenamine had postoperative sepsis. ASB resolved at 4–9 weeks postoperatively in 56.8% in the cephalosporin group and 26.2% in the meth-
enamine hippurate group (P &#x003D; .0082). In a trial [186] of 
42 patients with ASB undergoing TURP randomized to receive cefotaxime preoperatively and then daily for 5 days or meth-enamine hippurate from the day prior to operation for a total of 6 days, postoperative fever occurred in 1 of 22 (4.5%) patients receiving cefotaxime and 9 of 20 (45%) receiving methenamine hippurate (P < .05). No cefotaxime patients and 2 methenam-ine patients had septicemia, but this difference was not statis-tically significant. Thus, these studies support perioperative Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article/68/10/e83/5407612 by MUSC Library user on 12 November 2025

IDSA 2019 Clinical Practice Guideline for the Management of Asymptomatic Bacteriuria • cid  2019:68 (15 May) • e105antimicrobial treatment of ASB being superior to methenamine 
treatment.
Two RCTs assessed different antimicrobial regimens for 
treatment of preoperative ASB [187, 188]. A randomized trial 
of TURP patients compared 20 days’ treatment with a combina-
tion of pivmecillinam-pivampicillin (25 patients) or with TMP-
SMX (28 patients), both initiated 1 day prior to surgery [187]. Bacteriologic cure on day 4 posttreatment was 88% with pivme-cillinam-pivampicillin and 78.6% with TMP-SMX. TMP-SMX was compared to norfloxacin for 5 days’ treatment, starting the evening before the procedure, in 165 randomized patients with ASB (>10
5 CFU/mL) prior to TURP [188]. The accumulated 
elimination rates for the 10- to 42-day follow-up period were 68.5% and 76.2%, respectively. No patient had any clinical signs of upper UTI or septicemia.
Two RCTs reported since the publication of the previous 
guideline assess the efficacy of single-dose compared to lon-ger-course antimicrobial treatment of preoperative ASB [189, 190]. In 1 trial [189], 31 patients were randomized to a single dose given 30–60 minutes before the surgical procedure and a second dose if a catheter was placed postoperatively, and 28 patients to antimicrobial treatment starting 3 days prior to and continuing for 15 days after surgery. Urologic procedures in-
cluded TURP , TURBT, double J insertion and exchange, cys-
tostomy insertion, nephrostomy tube insertion or exchange, extracorporeal shock wave lithotripsy, and ureterorenoscopy. None of the patients enrolled in the study developed sepsis or upper UTI. Short-course treatment of ASB resulted in a signifi-cantly decreased length of stay and cost of antimicrobial therapy, while longer therapy was associated with subsequent isolation of an increased number of resistant microorganisms. The second trial [ 190] enrolled patients with SCI and ASB undergoing elec-
tive endoscopic urological surgeries, and compared a single dose (35 patients) given 30 minutes prior to the procedure to 3–5 days of preprocedural antimicrobial treatment (25 patients). There were no significant differences in the frequency of postoperative UTI between the 2 groups. However, the single-dose regimen was associated with a significant decrease in antimicrobial cost (3.6 ± 6.1 US dollars vs 33.1 ± 47.6 US dollars; P  &#x003D; .01), 
and individuals who received the longer course reported greater preprocedural anxiety (18 vs 0%; P  < .05). These 2 studies sug-
gest that single-dose preoperative treatment of ASB is likely suf-ficient and associated with fewer adverse events.
Rationale
Bacteriuria may be an important cause of serious postopera-tive infectious complications in patients undergoing transure-thral surgery. Perioperative antimicrobials probably reduce the risk of sepsis by approximately 6% (moderate certainty) and of UTIs by approximately 9% (moderate certainty). Evidence from 
other surgical procedures consistently supports antimicrobial treatment or prophylaxis for patients prior to contaminated or 
clean-contaminated procedures. There may not be an impor -
tant difference between a short course (ie, single dose) and more prolonged antimicrobials in decreasing the risk of sepsis or UTI (both low quality). However, prolonged antimicrobial courses increase cost and adverse effects (high quality), and probably increase length of stay and patient anxiety (moderate quality).
Research Needs
Further studies are required to define the optimal preoperative antimicrobial regimen for endoscopic urologic procedures.
XIV. Should Patients Undergoing Implantation of Urologic Devices or 
Living With Urologic Devices Be Screened or Treated for ASB?
Recommendations
 1. In patients planning to undergo surgery for artificial urine 
sphincter or penile prothesis implantation, we suggest not 
screening for or treating ASB (weak recommendation, very 
low-quality evidence). Remarks: All patients should re-
ceive standard perioperative prophylaxis prior to device 
implantation.
 2. In patients living with implanted urological devices, we sug-
gest not screening for or treating ASB (weak recommenda -
tion, very low-quality evidence).
Evidence Summary
The prevalence of ASB in older men is 3.6%–19% in the com-munity [6, 11], and 15%–40% in long-term care facilities [6, 
191] (Table 1). Most men requiring artificial urine sphincter (AUS) or penile prothesis (PP) are older or have other comor -
bidities such as diabetes or catheters, so this population has a 
high prevalence of ASB. A recent review reported that 45% of 
men undergoing AUS and 18% undergoing PP had preopera-tive ASB [192].
Treatment of ASB Prior to Urological Device Implantation
Prosthetic device infection has been reported to occur in 1%–2% of AUS implants and 2%–8% of PP implants [193, 194]. 
Although AUS and PP implantations are conducted without entry into the urinary tract (aside from initial catheterization), obtaining urine cultures and treatment of patients with positive results before implantation has been recommended [195]. A re-cent survey of high-volume implanters reported that as many as 50% do not routinely obtain preoperative urine cultures, 
although many obtain a urinalysis [196]. This practice is of 
questionable efficacy to prevent prosthetic device infection, as prosthetic infections are typically associated with biofilm-pro-ducing skin flora rather than common urinary pathogens [197, 
198].
Our systematic literature search identified only 1 publication 
assessing the role of ASB treatment prior to urological device implantation. In a retrospective study [192], 721 AUS and PP Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article/68/10/e83/5407612 by MUSC Library user on 12 November 2025

e106 • cid  2019:68 (15 May) • Nicolle et alprocedures were performed in 689 patients by a single surgeon 
at a tertiary institution. For the 454 patients with a preoperative urine culture, 337 were negative and 117 had untreated ASB. All patients received routine broad-spectrum perioperative antimicrobial prophylaxis. At a median follow-up of 15 months, 
postoperative prosthetic device infections occurred in 15 of 
454 (3.3%) devices implanted, and the frequency was similar for patients with or without bacteriuria (3% and 4.3%, respec-tively). The frequency of preoperative ASB was 2-fold higher in the AUS cases, but subsequent device infection rates were similar for subjects with AUS or PP implantation. Only 1 of 15 (7%) device infections had the same organism isolated from the infection and the preoperative urine culture.
Treatment of ASB in Patients Living With Urological Devices
No evidence identified through the systematic literature search addressed the treatment of ASB in patients living with previously implanted urological devices. Screening for ASB in this patient 
group is likely associated with significant cost. Furthermore, in 
most other nonsurgical patient groups, the treatment of ASB has not been beneficial.
Rationale
ASB is common in this population, and we did not identify evi-dence that ASB present during device implantation surgery is associated with an increased risk for device infection following surgery. The universal use of perioperative antimicrobials for prophylaxis of surgical infection is effective for resolution of 
most episodes of ASB [199]. Therefore, any additional benefit 
from screening and treating ASB would be negligible. Bacterial species isolated from device infections are usually distinct from organisms isolated from ASB. We also did not identify any evi-dence that ASB in patients with a urological device in situ is a risk factor for urological device infection. Similar to other rec-ommendations where the benefits of screening and treatment of ASB are very uncertain but there is high-quality evidence for adverse consequences, costs, and burdens of screening for and treating ASB, the consensus of the panel was that ASB should 
not be screened for or treated in patients living with urological 
devices.
Research Needs
Current recommendations for treatment of ASB prior to uro-logic device implantation are based on the results of a single retrospective study. Further prospective studies of high meth-odologic quality should be undertaken to validate these results.
Supplementary Data
Supplementary materials are available at Clinical Infectious Diseases online. 
Consisting of data provided by the authors to benefit the reader, the posted materials are not copyedited and are the sole responsibility of the authors, so questions or comments should be addressed to the corresponding author.Notes
Acknowledgments.  The expert panel expresses its gratitude for 
thoughtful reviews of an earlier version by Drs Florian Wagenlehner, James R. Johnson, and Ann Stapleton. The panel thanks the Infectious Diseases Society of America (IDSA) for supporting guideline development, and spe-cifically Vita Washington and Rebecca Goldwater for their continued sup-port throughout the guideline process. The panel expresses its gratitude for librarian Shandra Knight for continued literature support throughout the development of the guideline.
Financial support.  Support for these guidelines was provided by the 
Infectious Diseases Society of America.
Potential conflicts of interest. The following list is a reflection of what 
has been reported to the IDSA. To provide thorough transparency, the IDSA requires full disclosure of all relationships, regardless of relevancy to the guideline topic. Evaluation of such relationships as potential conflicts of interest is determined by a review process which includes assessment by the Standards and Practice Guideline Committee (SPGC) Chair, the SPGC liaison to the development panel and the Board of Directors liaison to the SPGC, and if necessary, the Conflicts of Interests (COI) Task Force of the Board. This assessment of disclosed relationships for possible COI will be based on the relative weight of the financial relationship (ie, monetary amount) and the relevance of the relationship (ie, the degree to which an association might reasonably be interpreted by an independent observer as related to the topic or recommendation of consideration). The reader of these guidelines should be mindful of this when the list of disclosures is reviewed. S. F. B. has received research grants from the National Institutes of Health (NIH), the Veterans Affairs (V A) Cooperative Studies Program, V A Health Services Research and Development Service (HSR&D)/CREATE, the V A/Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) Network, and Pfizer. D. D. has served as a consultant for Tetraphase and received research grants from V A Clinical Science Research and Development Merit Review, and the V A Cooperative Studies Program, K. G. has served as a consultant for Paratek, Ocean Spray, Iterum, and Tetraphase and has received other remuneration from UpToDate. S. G. has served as a consultant for Nordic Pharma, T. M. H. has served as a consultant for Damone, Melnata, Melinta OM Pharma, GlaxoSmithline (GSK), Ocean Spray, Paratek, Shionogi, Achaogen, and Cubist; has ownership interest in Fimbrion Therapeutics; and has received other remuneration from Fimbrion Therapeutics and UpToDate. M. J. M. has received research grants from NIH and has served as a consultant to Iterum Therapeutics. B. K. has received research grants from the European Association of Urology and served as a consultant for F. Hoffmann-La Roche Ltd. L. N. has served as a consultant for Paratek, Tetraphase, Utility, and GSK. R. S. is a member of the GRADE Working Group. S. S. has received research grants and contracts from the Department of the Veterans Administration, American Hospital Association, European Commission, NIH, CDC, and Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality (AHRQ); has received honoraria from Doximity and numerous individual hospitals and nonprofit organizations to discuss infection prevention, lead-ership, and patient safety; has ownership interest in Doximity and Jvion; and has a patent pending. B. T. has received research grants from V A HSR&D, AHRQ, CDC, NIH, and Zambon Pharmaceuticals, and one-time con-sulting fees from Paratek and Zambon Pharmaceuticals. B. W . has received research grants from Vifor; has served as a consultant for Vifor, Bionorica, and Leo Pharma; and has received honoraria from Vifor, Binorica, Astellas, and Leo Pharma. All other authors report no potential conflicts. All authors have submitted the ICMJE Form for Disclosure of Potential Conflicts of Interest. Conflicts that the editors consider relevant to the content of the manuscript have been disclosed.
References
1. Guyatt GH, Oxman AD, Vist GE, et al; GRADE Working Group. GRADE: an 
emerging consensus on rating quality of evidence and strength of recommenda-
tions. BMJ 2008; 336:924–6.
2. Jaeschke R, Guyatt GH, Dellinger P , et al; GRADE Working Group. Use of GRADE 
grid to reach decisions on clinical practice guidelines when consensus is elusive. 
BMJ 2008; 337:a744.Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article/68/10/e83/5407612 by MUSC Library user on 12 November 2025

IDSA 2019 Clinical Practice Guideline for the Management of Asymptomatic Bacteriuria • cid  2019:68 (15 May) • e1073. Schünemann HJ, Oxman AD, Brozek J, et al. GRADE: assessing the quality of evi-
dence for diagnostic recommendations. Evid Based Med 2008; 13:162–3.
4. Guyatt GH, Oxman AD, Kunz R, Vist GE, Falck-Ytter Y , Schünemann HJ; GRADE 
Working Group. What is “quality of evidence” and why is it important to clini-
cians? BMJ 2008; 336:995–8.
5. Guyatt GH, Oxman AD, Kunz R, et al; GRADE Working Group. Going from evi-
dence to recommendations. BMJ 2008; 336:1049–51.
6. Nicolle LE, Bradley S, Colgan R, Rice JC, Schaeffer A, Hooton TM; Infectious 
Diseases Society of America; American Society of Nephrology; American Geriatric Society. Infectious Diseases Society of America guidelines for the diag-
nosis and treatment of asymptomatic bacteriuria in adults. Clin Infect Dis 2005; 
40:643–54.
7. Siegel SR, Siegel B, Sokoloff BZ, Kanter MH. Urinary infection in infants and pre-
school children. Five-year follow-up. Am J Dis Child 1980; 134:369–72.
8. Savage DC. Natural history of covert bacteriuria in schoolgirls. Kidney Int Suppl 
1975; 4:S90–5.
9. Turner GRA, Farnsworth R, Wichen B, Robinson H. Sequelae of covert bacteriuria 
in schoolgirls. A four-year follow-up study. Lancet 1978; 1:889–93.
10. Emans SJ, Grace E, Masland RP Jr. Asymptomatic bacteriuria in adolescent girls: I. 
Epidemiology. Pediatrics 1979; 64:433–7.
11. Nicolle LE. Asymptomatic bacteriuria: when to screen and when to treat. Infect 
Dis Clin North Am 2003; 17:367–94.
12. Zhanel GG, Harding GK, Nicolle LE. Asymptomatic bacteriuria in patients with 
diabetes mellitus. Rev Infect Dis 1991; 13:150–4.
13. Nicolle LE. Urinary tract infections in the older adult. Clin Geriatr Med 2016; 
32:523–38.
14. Bakke A, Digranes A. Bacteriuria in patients treated with clean intermittent cath-
eterization. Scand J Infect Dis 1991; 23:577–82.
15. Waites KB, Canupp KC, DeVivo MJ. Epidemiology and risk factors for uri-
nary tract infection following spinal cord injury. Arch Phys Med Rehabil 1993; 
74:691–5.
16. Fiorante S, López-Medrano F, Lizasoain M, et al. Systematic screening and treat-
ment of asymptomatic bacteriuria in renal transplant recipients. Kidney Int 2010; 
78:774–81.
17. Goh YSB, Deng Z, Cheong PSC, et al. Screening for asymptomatic bacteruria at 
one month after adult kidney transplantation: clinical factors and implications. 
Clin Transplant 2017; 31. doi:10.1111/ctr.12954.
18. Hooton TM, Bradley SF, Cardenas DD, et al. Diagnosis, prevention, and treatment 
of catheter-associated urinary tract infection in adults: 2009 international clinical 
practice guidelines from the Infectious Diseases Society of America. Clin Infect 
Dis 2010; 50:625–63.
19. Warren JW , Tenney JH, Hoopes JM, Muncie HL, Anthony WC. A prospective 
microbiologic study of bacteriuria in patients with chronic indwelling urethral catheters. J Infect Dis 1982; 146:719–23.
20. Nicolle LE. The paradigm shift to non-treatment of asymptomatic bacteriuria. 
Pathogens 2016; 5. doi:10.3390/pathogens5020038.
21. Hansson S, Jodal U, Lincoln K, Svanborg-Edén C. Untreated asymptomatic bacte-
riuria in girls: II—Effect of phenoxymethylpenicillin and erythromycin given for 
intercurrent infections. BMJ 1989; 298:856–9.
22. Harding GK, Zhanel GG, Nicolle LE, Cheang M; Manitoba Diabetes Urinary Tract 
Infection Study Group. Antimicrobial treatment in diabetic women with asymp-tomatic bacteriuria. N Engl J Med 2002; 347:1576–83.
23. Warren JW , Anthony WC, Hoopes JM, Muncie HL Jr. Cephalexin for susceptible 
bacteriuria in afebrile, long-term catheterized patients. JAMA 1982; 248:454–8.
24. Nicolle LE, Mayhew WJ, Bryan L. Prospective randomized comparison of therapy 
and no therapy for asymptomatic bacteriuria in institutionalized elderly women. 
Am J Med 1987; 83:27–33.
25. Nicolle LE, Bjornson J, Harding GK, MacDonell JA. Bacteriuria in elderly institu-
tionalized men. N Engl J Med 1983; 309:1420–5.
26. Erickson RP , Merritt JL, Opitz JL, Ilstrup DM. Bacteriuria during follow-up in 
patients with spinal cord injury: I. Rates of bacteriuria in various bladder-empty-ing methods. Arch Phys Med Rehabil 1982; 63:409–12.
27. Pappas PG, Kauffman CA, Andes DR, et al. Executive summary: clinical prac-
tice guideline for the management of candidiasis: 2016 update by the Infectious Diseases Society of America. Clin Infect Dis 2016; 62:409–17.
28. Flokas ME, Detsis M, Alevizakos M, Mylonakis E. Prevalence of ESBL-producing 
Enterobacteriaceae in paediatric urinary tract infections: a systematic review and 
meta-analysis. J Infect 2016; 73:547–57.
29. Bader MS, Loeb M, Brooks AA. An update on the management of urinary tract 
infections in the era of antimicrobial resistance. Postgrad Med 2017; 129:242–58.
30. Collins CD, Kabara JJ, Michienzi SM, Malani AN. Impact of an antimicrobial 
stewardship care bundle to improve the management of patients with suspected or confirmed urinary tract infection. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 2016; 
37:1499–501.31. Leis JA, Rebick GW , Daneman N, et al. Reducing antimicrobial therapy for asymp-
tomatic bacteriuria among noncatheterized inpatients: a proof-of-concept study. 
Clin Infect Dis 2014; 58:980–3.
32. Kelley D, Aaronson P , Poon E, McCarter YS, Bato B, Jankowski CA. Evaluation 
of an antimicrobial stewardship approach to minimize overuse of antibiotics in 
patients with asymptomatic bacteriuria. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 2014; 
35:193–5.
33. Hartley S, Valley S, Kuhn L, et al. Overtreatment of asymptomatic bacteriuria: 
identifying targets for improvement. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 2015; 
36:470–3.
34. Trautner BW , Grigoryan L, Petersen NJ, et al. Effectiveness of an antimicrobial 
stewardship approach for urinary catheter-associated asymptomatic bacteriuria. 
JAMA Intern Med 2015; 175:1120–7.
35. Sloane PD, Kistler CE, Reed D, Weber DJ, Ward K, Zimmerman S. Urine cul-
ture testing in community nursing homes: gateway to antibiotic overprescribing. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 2017; 38:524–31.
36. Spivak ES, Burk M, Zhang R, et al. Management of bacteriuria in Veterans Affairs 
hospitals. Clin Infect Dis 2017; 65:910–7.
37. Phillips CD, Adepoju O, Stone N, et al. Asymptomatic bacteriuria, antibiotic use, 
and suspected urinary tract infections in four nursing homes. BMC Geriatr 2012; 
12:73.
38. Brown E, Talbot GH, Axelrod P , Provencher M, Hoegg C. Risk factors for 
Clostridium difficile  toxin–associated diarrhea. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 
1990; 11:283–90.
39. Stevens V , Dumyati G, Fine LS, Fisher SG, van Wijngaarden E. Cumulative antibi-
otic exposures over time and the risk of Clostridium difficile  infection. Clin Infect 
Dis 2011; 53:42–8.
40. Hooton TM, Scholes D, Stapleton AE, et al. A prospective study of asymptomatic 
bacteriuria in sexually active young women. N Engl J Med 2000; 343:992–7.
41. Takala J, Jousimies H, Sievers K. Screening for and treatment of bacteriuria in a 
middle-aged female population. I. The prevalence of bacteriuria, urinary tract 
infections under treatment and symptoms of urinary tract infections in the 
Säkylä-Köyliö project. Acta Med Scand 1977; 202:69–73.
42. Kaitz AL, Hodder EW . Bacteriuria and pyelonephritis of pregnancy. A prospective 
study of 616 pregnant women. N Engl J Med 1961; 265:667–72.
43. Savage WE, Hajj SN, Kass EH. Demographic and prognostic characteristics of bac-
teriuria in pregnancy. Medicine (Baltimore) 1967; 46:385–407.
44. Rodhe N, Löfgren S, Matussek A, et al. Asymptomatic bacteriuria in the elderly: 
high prevalence and high turnover of strains. Scand J Infect Dis 2008; 40:804–10.
45. Hedin K, Petersson C, Widebäck K, Kahlmeter G, Mölstad S. Asymptomatic bac-
teriuria in a population of elderly in municipal institutional care. Scand J Prim Health Care 2002; 20:166–8.
46. Gleckman R, Esposito A, Crowley M, Natsios GA. Reliability of a single urine 
culture in establishing diagnosis of asymptomatic bacteriuria in adult males. J Clin Microbiol 1979; 9:596–7.
47. Stark RP , Maki DG. Bacteriuria in the catheterized patient. What quantitative level 
of bacteriuria is relevant? N Engl J Med 1984; 311:560–4.
48. Tenney JH, Warren JW . Bacteriuria in women with long-term catheters: paired 
comparison of indwelling and replacement catheters. J Infect Dis 1988; 
157:199–202.
49. Jodal U. The natural history of bacteriuria in childhood. Infect Dis Clin North 
Am 1987; 1:713–29.
50. Abbott GD. Neonatal bacteriuria: a prospective study in 1460 infants. Br Med J 
1972; 1:267–9.
51. Kunin CM, Deutscher R, Paquin A Jr. Urinary tract infection in school children: 
an epidemiologic, clinical and laboratory study. Medicine (Baltimore) 1964; 43:91–130.
52. Kunin CM. Emergence of bacteriuria, proteinuria, and symptomatic urinary tract 
infections among a population of school girls followed for 7 years. Pediatrics 1968; 41:968–76.
53. Gillenwater JY , Harrison RB, Kunin CM. Natural history of bacteriuria in school-
girls. A long-term case-control study. N Engl J Med 1979; 301:396–9.
54. Hansson S, Jodal U, Norén L, Bjure J. Untreated bacteriuria in asymptomatic girls 
with renal scarring. Pediatrics 1989; 84:964–8.
55. Lindberg U, Claesson I, Hanson LA, Jodal U. Asymptomatic bacteriuria in school-
girls. VIII. Clinical course during a 3-year follow-up. J Pediatr 1978; 92:194–9.
56. Lindberg U. Asymptomatic bacteriuria in school girls. V . The clinical course and 
response to treatment. Acta Paediatr Scand 1975; 64:718–24.
57. Kunin CM. The natural history of recurrent bacteriuria in schoolgirls. N Engl J 
Med 1970; 282:1443–8.
58. Savage DC, Howie G, Adler K, Wilson MI. Controlled trial of therapy in covert 
bacteriuria of childhood. Lancet 1975; 1:358–61.
59. Kemper KJ, Avner ED. The case against screening urinalyses for asymptomatic 
bacteriuria in children. Am J Dis Child 1992; 146:343–6.Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article/68/10/e83/5407612 by MUSC Library user on 12 November 2025

e108 • cid  2019:68 (15 May) • Nicolle et al60. Asscher AW , Sussman M, Waters WE, et al. Asymptomatic significant bacteriuria 
in the non-pregnant woman. II. Response to treatment and follow-up. Br Med J 
1969; 1:804–6.
61. United States Preventive Services Task Force. Screening for asymptomatic bacteri-
uria in adults: U.S. Preventive Services Task Force reaffirmation recommendation 
statement. Ann Intern Med 2008; 149:43–7.
62. Dull RB, Friedman SK, Risoldi ZM, Rice EC, Starlin RC, Destache CJ. 
Antimicrobial treatment of asymptomatic bacteriuria in noncatheterized adults: a systematic review. Pharmacotherapy 2014; 34:941–60.
63. Beerepoot MA, den Heijer CD, Penders J, Prins JM, Stobberingh EE, Geerlings SE. 
Predictive value of Escherichia coli  susceptibility in strains causing asymptomatic 
bacteriuria for women with recurrent symptomatic urinary tract infections re-ceiving prophylaxis. Clin Microbiol Infect 2012; 18:E84–90.
64. Cai T, Mazzoli S, Mondaini N, et al. The role of asymptomatic bacteriuria in young 
women with recurrent urinary tract infections: to treat or not to treat? Clin Infect Dis 2012; 55:771–7.
65. Patterson TF, Andriole VT. Detection, significance, and therapy of bacteriuria in 
pregnancy. Update in the managed health care era. Infect Dis Clin North Am 
1997; 11:593–608.
66. American Academy of Pediatrics, American College of Obstetricians and 
Gynecologists. Guidelines for perinatal care. 7th ed. Elk Grove Village, Illinois 
and Washington, DC: AAP/ACOG, 2012:112–7.
67. United States Preventive Services Task Force. Final update summary: asymp-
tomatic bacteriuria in adults: screening. Available at: https://www.uspre-ventiveservicestaskforce.org/Page/Document/UpdateSummaryFinal/
asymptomatic-bacteriuria-in-adults-screening . Accessed 10 May 2017.
68. Smaill FM, Vazquez JC. Antibiotics for asymptomatic bacteriuria in pregnancy. 
Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2015; CD000490.
69. Kazemier BM, Koningstein FN, Schneeberger C, et al. Maternal and neonatal 
consequences of treated and untreated asymptomatic bacteriuria in pregnancy: a prospective cohort study with an embedded randomised controlled trial. Lancet 
Infect Dis 2015; 15:1324–33.
70. Widmer M, Lopez I, Gulmezoglu AM, Mignini L, Roganti A. Duration of treat-
ment for asymptomatic bacteriuria during pregnancy. Cochrane Database Syst 
Rev 2015; CD000491.
71. Lumbiganon P , Villar J, Laopaiboon M, et al; World Health Organization 
Asymptomatic Bacteriuria Trial Group. One-day compared with 7-day nitrofu-rantoin for asymptomatic bacteriuria in pregnancy: a randomized controlled trial. 
Obstet Gynecol 2009; 113:339–45.
72. Gupta K, Hooton TM, Naber KG, et al. International clinical practice guide-
lines for the treatment of acute uncomplicated cystitis and pyelonephritis in 
women: a 2010 update by the Infectious Diseases Society of America and the 
European Society for Microbiology and Infectious Diseases. Clin Infect Dis 2011; 
52:e103–20.
73. Reeves DS. Treatment of bacteriuria in pregnancy with single dose fosfomycin 
trometamol: a review. Infection 1992; 20(Suppl 4):S313–6.
74. Keating GM. Fosfomycin trometamol: a review of its use as a single-dose oral 
treatment for patients with acute lower urinary tract infections and pregnant 
women with asymptomatic bacteriuria. Drugs 2013; 73:1951–66.
75. Estebanez A, Pascual R, Gil V , Ortiz F, Santibáñez M, Pérez Barba C. Fosfomycin 
in a single dose versus a 7-day course of amoxicillin-clavulanate for the treatment of asymptomatic bacteriuria during pregnancy. Eur J Clin Microbiol Infect Dis 
2009; 28:1457–64.
76. Khawaja AR, Khan FB, Dar TI, Bhat AH, Wani MS, Wazir BS. Fosfomycin tro-
methamine. Antibiotic of choice in the female patient: a multicenter study. Cent 
European J Urol 2015; 68:371–5.
77. Boscia JA, Kobasa WD, Knight RA, Abrutyn E, Levison ME, Kaye D. Therapy vs 
no therapy for bacteriuria in elderly ambulatory nonhospitalized women. JAMA 1987; 257:1067–71.
78. Abrutyn E, Mossey J, Berlin JA, et al. Does asymptomatic bacteriuria predict mor -
tality and does antimicrobial treatment reduce mortality in elderly ambulatory 
women? Ann Intern Med 1994; 120:827–33.
79. Ouslander JG, Schapira M, Schnelle JF, et al. Does eradicating bacteriuria affect the 
severity of chronic urinary incontinence in nursing home residents? Ann Intern Med 1995; 122:749–54.
80. Loeb M, Bentley DW , Bradley S, et al. Development of minimum criteria for the 
initiation of antibiotics in residents of long-term-care facilities: results of a con-
sensus conference. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 2001; 22:120–4.
81. High KP , Bradley SF, Gravenstein S, et al. Clinical practice guideline for the eval-
uation of fever and infection in older adult residents of long-term care facilities: 
2008 update by the Infectious Diseases Society of America. J Am Geriatr Soc 2009; 57:375–94.
82. Stone ND, Ashraf MS, Calder J, et al; Society for Healthcare Epidemiology 
Long-Term Care Special Interest Group. Surveillance definitions of infections in long-term care facilities: revisiting the McGeer criteria. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 2012; 33:965–77.
83. Dufour AB, Shaffer ML, D’ Agata EM, Habtemariam D, Mitchell SL. Survival after 
suspected urinary tract infection in individuals with advanced dementia. J Am 
Geriatr Soc 2015; 63:2472–7.
84. Mitchell SL, Shaffer ML, Loeb MB, et al. Infection management and multidrug-re-
sistant organisms in nursing home residents with advanced dementia. JAMA 
Intern Med 2014; 174:1660–7.
85. D’ Agata E, Loeb MB, Mitchell SL. Challenges in assessing nursing home residents 
with advanced dementia for suspected urinary tract infections. J Am Geriatr Soc 2013; 61:62–6.
86. Giamarellou H, Dontas AS, Petrikkos G, Gnardellis C, Zorbas P , Philippou P . 
Survival of elderly bacteriuric subjects following long-term quinolone therapy. J 
Chemother 2007; 19:185–92.
87. Das R, Towle V , Van Ness PH, Juthani-Mehta M. Adverse outcomes in nursing 
home residents with increased episodes of observed bacteriuria. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 2011; 32:84–6.
88. Rotjanapan P , Dosa D, Thomas KS. Potentially inappropriate treatment of uri-
nary tract infections in two Rhode Island nursing homes. Arch Intern Med 2011; 
171:438–43.
89. Sundvall PD, Elm M, Ulleryd P , et al. Interleukin-6 concentrations in the urine 
and dipstick analyses were related to bacteriuria but not symptoms in the elderly: 
a cross sectional study of 421 nursing home residents. BMC Geriatr 2014; 14:88.
90. Kjölvmark C, Tschernij E, Öberg J, Påhlman LI, Linder A, Åkesson P . Distinguishing 
asymptomatic bacteriuria from urinary tract infection in the elderly—the use of 
urine levels of heparin-binding protein and interleukin-6. Diagn Microbiol Infect 
Dis 2016; 85:243–8.
91. Yu Y , Zielinski MD, Rolfe MA, et al. Similar neutrophil-driven inflammatory and 
antibacterial responses in elderly patients with symptomatic and asymptomatic bacteriuria. Infect Immun 2015; 83:4142–53.
92. Rodhe N, Löfgren S, Strindhall J, Matussek A, Mölstad S. Cytokines in urine in 
elderly subjects with acute cystitis and asymptomatic bacteriuria. Scand J Prim 
Health Care 2009; 27:74–9.
93. Sundén F, Wullt B. Predictive value of urinary interleukin-6 for symptomatic uri-
nary tract infections in a nursing home population. Int J Urol 2016; 23:168–74.
94. Juthani-Mehta M, Quagliarello V , Perrelli E, Towle V , Van Ness PH, Tinetti M. 
Clinical features to identify urinary tract infection in nursing home residents: a cohort study. J Am Geriatr Soc 2009; 57:963–70.
95. Balogun SA, Philbrick JT. Delirium, a symptom of UTI in the elderly: fact or fable? 
A systematic review. Can Geriatr J 2014; 17:22–6.
96. Bhattacharya B, Maung A, Barre K, et al. Postoperative delirium is associated with 
increased intensive care unit and hospital length of stays after liver transplanta-
tion. J Surg Res 2017; 207:223–8.
97. Sundvall PD, Ulleryd P , Gunnarsson PK.  Urine culture doubtful in determining 
etiology of diffuse symptoms among elderly individuals: a cross sectional study of 32 nursing homes. BMC Fam Pract 2011; 12:36. doi:10.1186/1471-2296-12-36.
98. Potts L, Cross S, MacLennan WJ, Watt B. A double-blind comparative study of 
norfloxacin versus placebo in hospitalised elderly patients with asymptomatic 
bacteriuria. Arch Gerontol Geriatr 1996; 23:153–61.
99. Silver SA, Baillie L, Simor AE. Positive urine cultures: a major cause of inap-
propriate antimicrobial use in hospitals? Can J Infect Dis Med Microbiol 2009; 20:107–11.
100. Dasgupta M, Brymer C, Elsayed S. Treatment of asymptomatic UTI in older 
delirious medical in-patients: a prospective cohort study. Arch Gerontol Geriatr 
2017; 72:127–34.
101. Nace DA, Drinka PJ, Crnich CJ. Clinical uncertainties in the approach to long 
term care residents with possible urinary tract infection. J Am Med Dir Assoc 2014; 15:133–9.
102. Rhoads J, Clayman A, Nelson S. The relationship of urinary tract infections and 
falls in a nursing home. Director 2007; 15:22–6.
103. Rowe T, Towle V , Van Ness PH, Juthani-Mehta M. Lack of positive association 
between falls and bacteriuria plus pyuria in older nursing home residents. J Am 
Geriatr Soc 2013; 61:653–4.
104. Geerlings SE, Stolk RP , Camps MJ, et al. Consequences of asymptomatic bacteri-
uria in women with diabetes mellitus. Arch Intern Med 2001; 161:1421–7.
105. Semetkowska-Jurkiewicz E, Horoszek-Maziarz S, Galiński J, Manitius A, Krupa-
Wojciechowska B. The clinical course of untreated asymptomatic bacteriuria in diabetic patients—14-year follow-up. Mater Med Pol 1995; 27:91–5.
106. Meiland R, Geerlings SE, Stolk RP , Netten PM, Schneeberger PM, Hoepelman AI. 
Asymptomatic bacteriuria in women with diabetes mellitus: effect on renal func-
tion after 6 years of follow-up. Arch Intern Med 2006; 166:2222–7.
107. Parasuraman R, Julian K; AST Infectious Diseases Community of Practice. 
Urinary tract infections in solid organ transplantation. Am J Transplant 2013; 13(Suppl 4):327–36.Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article/68/10/e83/5407612 by MUSC Library user on 12 November 2025

IDSA 2019 Clinical Practice Guideline for the Management of Asymptomatic Bacteriuria • cid  2019:68 (15 May) • e109108. Coussement J, Abramowicz D. Should we treat asymptomatic bacteriuria after 
renal transplantation? Nephrol Dial Transplant 2014; 29:260–2.
109. Green H, Rahamimov R, Gafter U, Leibovitci L, Paul M. Antibiotic prophylaxis 
for urinary tract infections in renal transplant recipients: a systematic review and 
meta-analysis. Transpl Infect Dis 2011; 13:441–7.
110. Singh R, Bemelman FJ, Hodiamont CJ, Idu MM, Ten Berge IJ, Geerlings SE. The 
impact of trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole as Pneumocystis jiroveci pneumonia 
prophylaxis on the occurrence of asymptomatic bacteriuria and urinary tract 
infections among renal allograft recipients: a retrospective before-after study. 
BMC Infect Dis 2016; 16:90.
111. Fiorante S, Fernández-Ruiz M, López-Medrano F, et al. Acute graft pyelonephri-
tis in renal transplant recipients: incidence, risk factors and long-term outcome. 
Nephrol Dial Transplant 2011; 26:1065–73.
112. Gołębiewska JE, Dębska-Ślizień A, Rutkowski B. Treated asymptomatic bac-
teriuria during first year after renal transplantation. Transpl Infect Dis 2014; 16:605–15.
113. Vidal E, Cervera C, Cordero E, et al. Management of urinary tract infection 
in solid organ transplant recipients: consensus statement of the Group for the 
Study of Infection in Transplant Recipients (GESITRA) of the Spanish Society of 
Infectious Diseases and Clinical Microbiology (SEIMC) and the Spanish Network 
for Research in Infectious Diseases (REIPI). Enferm Infecc Microbiol Clin 2015; 
33:679.e1–21.
114. Ooms L, J IJ, Voor In ‘t Holt A, Betjes M, Vos M, Terkivatan T. Urinary tract 
infections after kidney transplantation: a risk factor analysis of 417 patients. Ann 
Transplant 2017; 22:402–8.
115. Giral M, Pascuariello G, Karam G, et al. Acute graft pyelonephritis and long-term 
kidney allograft outcome. Kidney Int 2002; 61:1880–6.
116. Dharnidharka VR, Agodoa LY , Abbott KC. Effects of urinary tract infection on 
outcomes after renal transplantation in children. Clin J Am Soc Nephrol 2007; 2:100–6.
117. Bodro M, Sanclemente G, Lipperheide I, et al. Impact of urinary tract infections 
on short-term kidney graft outcome. Clin Microbiol Infect 2015; 21:1104.e1–8.
118. Kroth LV , Barreiro FF, Saitovitch D, Traesel MA, d’ Avila DO, Poli-de-Figueiredo 
CE. Acute graft pyelonephritis occurring up to 30 days after kidney transplanta-
tion: epidemiology, risk factors, and survival. Transplant Proc 2016; 48:2298–300.
119. Pellé G, Vimont S, Levy PP , et al. Acute pyelonephritis represents a risk factor 
impairing long-term kidney graft function. Am J Transplant 2007; 7:899–907.
120. Abbott KC, Swanson SJ, Richter ER, et al. Late urinary tract infection after renal 
transplantation in the United States. Am J Kidney Dis 2004; 44:353–62.
121. Papasotiriou M, Savvidaki E, Kalliakmani P , et al. Predisposing factors to the 
development of urinary tract infections in renal transplant recipients and the impact on the long-term graft function. Ren Fail 2011; 33:405–10.
122. Kamath NS, John GT, Neelakantan N, Kirubakaran MG, Jacob CK. Acute graft 
pyelonephritis following renal transplantation. Transpl Infect Dis 2006; 8:140–7.
123. Tawab KA, Gheith O, Al Otaibi T, et al. Recurrent urinary tract infection among 
renal transplant recipients: risk factors and long-term outcome. Exp Clin Transplant 2017; 15:157–63.
124. Weigel F, Lemke A, Tönshoff B, et al. Febrile urinary tract infection after pediatric 
kidney transplantation: a multicenter, prospective observational study. Pediatr 
Nephrol 2016; 31:1021–8.
125. El Amari EB, Hadaya K, Bühler L, et al. Outcome of treated and untreated asymp-
tomatic bacteriuria in renal transplant recipients. Nephrol Dial Transplant 2011; 26:4109–14.
126. Green H, Rahamimov R, Goldberg E, et al. Consequences of treated versus 
untreated asymptomatic bacteriuria in the first year following kidney transplan-
tation: retrospective observational study. Eur J Clin Microbiol Infect Dis 2013; 
32:127–31.
127. Moradi M, Abbasi M, Moradi A, Boskabadi A, Jalali A. Effect of antibiotic therapy 
on asymptomatic bacteriuria in kidney transplant recipients. Urol J 2005; 2:32–5.
128. Origüen J, López-Medrano F, Fernández-Ruiz M, et al. Should asymptomatic bac-
teriuria be systematically treated in kidney transplant recipients? Results from a randomized controlled trial. Am J Transplant 2016; 16:2943–53.
129. Vidal E, Torre-Cisneros J, Blanes M, et al; Spanish Network for Research 
in Infectious Diseases (REIPI). Bacterial urinary tract infection after solid organ transplantation in the RESITRA cohort. Transpl Infect Dis 2012; 
14:595–603.
130. San Juan R, Aguado JM, Lumbreras C, et al; RESITRA Network, Spain. Incidence, 
clinical characteristics and risk factors of late infection in solid organ transplant 
recipients: data from the RESITRA study group. Am J Transplant 2007; 7:964–71.
131. Gurwith MJ, Brunton JL, Lank BA, Ronald AR, Harding GK. Granulocytopenia 
in hospitalized patients: I. Prognostic factors and etiology of fever. Am J Med 1978; 64:121–6.132. Daw MA, Munnelly P , McCann SR, Daly PA, Falkiner FR, Keane CT. Value of 
surveillance cultures in the management of neutropenic patients. Eur J Clin 
Microbiol Infect Dis 1988; 7:742–7.
133. Freifeld AG, Bow EJ, Sepkowitz KA, et al. Clinical practice guideline for the use 
of antimicrobial agents in neutropenic patients with cancer: 2010 update by the 
Infectious Diseases Society of America. Clin Infect Dis 2011; 52:e56–93.
134. Cunha BA, Lee P , Sahn R, Cai B. Does febrile neutropenia in adult oncology 
patients predispose to urinary tract infections or urosepsis? Infect Dis (Lond) 2015; 47:195–6.
135. Waites KB, Canupp KC, DeVivo MJ. Eradication of urinary tract infection follow-
ing spinal cord injury. Paraplegia 1993; 31:645–52.
136. Lewis RI, Carrion HM, Lockhart JL, Politano V A. Significance of asymptomatic 
bacteriuria in neurogenic bladder disease. Urology 1984; 23:343–7.
137. Mohler JL, Cowen DL, Flanigan RC. Suppression and treatment of urinary tract 
infection in patients with an intermittently catheterized neurogenic bladder. J Urol 1987; 138:336–40.
138. Maynard FM, Diokno AC. Urinary infection and complications during clean 
intermittent catheterization following spinal cord injury. J Urol 1984; 132:943–6.
139. Ditunno JF Jr, Formal CS. Chronic spinal cord injury. N Engl J Med 1994; 
330:550–6.
140. Cardenas DD, Hooton TM. Urinary tract infection in persons with spinal cord 
injury. Arch Phys Med Rehabil 1995; 76:272–80.
141. The prevention and management of urinary tract infections among people 
with spinal cord injuries. National Institute on Disability and Rehabilitation Research Consensus Statement. January 27–29, 1992. J Am Paraplegia Soc 1992; 
15:194–204.
142. Grabe M, Bartoletti R, Bjerklund Johansen TE, et al. Guidelines on urological 
infections. Arnhem, the Netherlands: European Association of Urology, 2015.
143. Wullt B, Svanborg C. Deliberate establishment of asymptomatic bacteriuria-a 
novel strategy to prevent recurrent UTI. Pathogens 2016; 5. doi:10.3390/
pathogens5030052.
144. Wullt B, Connell H, Röllano P , Månsson W , Colleen S, Svanborg C. Urodynamic 
factors influence the duration of Escherichia coli  bacteriuria in deliberately colo-
nized cases. J Urol 1998; 159:2057–62.
145. Andersson P , Engberg I, Lidin-Janson G, et al. Persistence of Escherichia coli  bacte -
riuria is not determined by bacterial adherence. Infect Immun 1991; 59:2915–21.
146. Hull R, Rudy D, Donovan W , et al. Urinary tract infection prophylaxis using 
Escherichia coli  83972 in spinal cord injured patients. J Urol 2000; 163:872–7.
147. Darouiche RO, Donovan WH, Del Terzo M, Thornby JI, Rudy DC, Hull RA. Pilot 
trial of bacterial interference for preventing urinary tract infection. Urology 2001; 
58:339–44.
148. Darouiche RO, Thornby JI, Cerra-Stewart C, Donovan WH, Hull RA. Bacterial 
interference for prevention of urinary tract infection: a prospective, randomized, placebo-controlled, double-blind pilot trial. Clin Infect Dis 2005; 41:1531–4.
149. Sundén F, Håkansson L, Ljunggren E, Wullt B. Escherichia coli  83972 bacteriuria 
protects against recurrent lower urinary tract infections in patients with incom-
plete bladder emptying. J Urol 2010; 184:179–85.
150. Pannek J. Treatment of urinary tract infection in persons with spinal cord injury: 
guidelines, evidence, and clinical practice. A questionnaire-based survey and 
review of the literature. J Spinal Cord Med 2011; 34:11–5.
151. Goetz LL, Cardenas DD, Kennelly M, et al. International spinal cord injury uri-
nary tract infection basic data set. Spinal Cord 2013; 51:700–4.
152. Massa LM, Hoffman JM, Cardenas DD. Validity, accuracy, and predictive value of 
urinary tract infection signs and symptoms in individuals with spinal cord injury on intermittent catheterization. J Spinal Cord Med 2009; 32:568–73.
153. Sundén F, Butler D, Wullt B. Triggered urine interleukin-6 correlates to severity of 
symptoms in nonfebrile lower urinary tract infections. J Urol 2017; 198:107–15.
154. Tambyah PA, Maki DG. Catheter-associated urinary tract infection is rarely 
symptomatic: a prospective study of 1497 catheterized patients. Arch Intern Med 2000; 160:678–82.
155. Hustinx WN, Mintjes-de Groot AJ, Verkooyen RP , Verbrugh HA. Impact of con-
current antimicrobial therapy on catheter-associated urinary tract infection. J 
Hosp Infect 1991; 18:45–56.
156. Srinivasan A, Karchmer T, Richards A, Song X, Perl TM. A prospective trial 
of a novel, silicone-based, silver-coated Foley catheter for the prevention of nosocomial urinary tract infections. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 2006; 
27:38–43.
157. Kizilbash QF, Petersen NJ, Chen GJ, Naik AD, Trautner BW . Bacteremia and mor -
tality with urinary catheter-associated bacteriuria. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 
2013; 34:1153–9.
158. Clec’h C, Schwebel C, Français A, et al; OutcomeRea Study Group. Does cathe-
ter-associated urinary tract infection increase mortality in critically ill patients? Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 2007; 28:1367–73.Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article/68/10/e83/5407612 by MUSC Library user on 12 November 2025

e110 • cid  2019:68 (15 May) • Nicolle et al159. Chant C, Smith OM, Marshall JC, Friedrich JO. Relationship of catheter-associ-
ated urinary tract infection to mortality and length of stay in critically ill patients: 
a systematic review and meta-analysis of observational studies. Crit Care Med 
2011; 39:1167–73.
160. Leone M, Perrin AS, Granier I, et al. A randomized trial of catheter change and 
short course of antibiotics for asymptomatic bacteriuria in catheterized ICU 
patients. Intensive Care Med 2007; 33:726–9.
161. Sobel JD, Kauffman CA, McKinsey D, et al. Candiduria: a randomized, dou-
ble-blind study of treatment with fluconazole and placebo. The National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases (NIAID) Mycoses Study Group. Clin Infect 
Dis 2000; 30:19–24.
162. Lusardi G, Lipp A, Shaw C. Antibiotic prophylaxis for short-term catheter bladder 
drainage in adults. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2013; 7:CD005428.
163. Harding GK, Nicolle LE, Ronald AR, et al. How long should catheter-acquired 
urinary tract infection in women be treated? A randomized controlled study. Ann Intern Med 1991; 114:713–9.
164. Marschall J, Carpenter CR, Fowler S, Trautner BW; CDC Prevention Epicenters 
Program. Antibiotic prophylaxis for urinary tract infections after removal of uri-
nary catheter: meta-analysis. BMJ 2013; 346:f3147.
165. Warren JW , Damron D, Tenney JH, Hoopes JM, Deforge B, Muncie HL Jr. Fever, 
bacteremia, and death as complications of bacteriuria in women with long-term 
urethral catheters. J Infect Dis 1987; 155:1151–8.
166. Kunin CM, Chin QF, Chambers S. Morbidity and mortality associated with 
indwelling urinary catheters in elderly patients in a nursing home–confounding due to the presence of associated diseases. J Am Geriatr Soc 1987; 35:1001–6.
167. Mylotte JM, Tayara A, Goodnough S. Epidemiology of bloodstream infection in 
nursing home residents: evaluation in a large cohort from multiple homes. Clin 
Infect Dis 2002; 35:1484–90.
168. Kunin CM, Douthitt S, Dancing J, Anderson J, Moeschberger M. The association 
between the use of urinary catheters and morbidity and mortality among elderly patients in nursing homes. Am J Epidemiol 1992; 135:291–301.
169. Breitenbucher RB. Bacterial changes in the urine samples of patients with long-
term indwelling catheters. Arch Intern Med 1984; 144:1585–8.
170. Bjork DT, Pelletier LL, Tight RR. Urinary tract infections with antibiotic resistant 
organisms in catheterized nursing home patients. Infect Control 1984; 5:173–6.
171. Irvine R, Johnson BL Jr, Amstutz HC. The relationship of genitourinary tract pro-
cedures and deep sepsis after total hip replacements. Surg Gynecol Obstet 1974; 139:701–6.
172. David TS, Vrahas MS. Perioperative lower urinary tract infections and deep 
sepsis in patients undergoing total joint arthroplasty. J Am Acad Orthop Surg 
2000; 8:66–74.
173. Ollivere BJ, Ellahee N, Logan K, Miller-Jones JC, Allen PW . Asymptomatic uri-
nary tract colonisation predisposes to superficial wound infection in elective orthopaedic surgery. Int Orthop 2009; 33:847–50.
174. Lawrence V A, Kroenke K. The unproven utility of preoperative urinalysis. Clinical 
use. Arch Intern Med 1988; 148:1370–3.
175. Sousa R, Muñoz-Mahamud E, Quayle J, et al. Is asymptomatic bacteriuria a risk 
factor for prosthetic joint infection? Clin Infect Dis 2014; 59:41–7.
176. Drekonja DM, Zarmbinski B, Johnson JR. Preoperative urine cultures at a 
Veterans Affairs medical center. JAMA Intern Med 2013; 173:71–2.
177. Cordero-Ampuero J, González-Fernández E, Martínez-Vélez D, Esteban J. Are 
antibiotics necessary in hip arthroplasty with asymptomatic bacteriuria? Seeding risk with/without treatment. Clin Orthop Relat Res 2013; 471:3822–9.
178. Grabe M. Antimicrobial agents in transurethral prostatic resection. J Urol 1987; 
138:245–52.179. Rao PN, Dube DA, Weightman NC, Oppenheim BA, Morris J. Prediction of sep-
ticemia following endourological manipulation for stones in the upper urinary 
tract. J Urol 1991; 146:955–60.
180. Herr HW . Should antibiotics be given prior to outpatient cystoscopy? A plea to 
urologists to practice antibiotic stewardship. Eur Urol 2014; 65:839–42.
181. Grabe M, Forsgren A, Hellsten S. The effect of a short antibiotic course in transu-
rethral prostatic resection. Scand J Urol Nephrol 1984; 18:37–42.
182. Grabe M, Forsgren A, Björk T, Hellsten S. Controlled trial of a short and a pro-
longed course with ciprofloxacin in patients undergoing transurethral prostatic surgery. Eur J Clin Microbiol 1987; 6:11–7.
183. Cafferkey MT, Falkiner FR, Gillespie W A, Murphy DM. Antibiotics for the pre-
vention of septicaemia in urology. J Antimicrob Chemother 1982; 9:471–7.
184. Murphy DM, Stassen L, Carr ME, Gillespie W A, Cafferkey MT, Falkiner FR. 
Bacteraemia during prostatectomy and other transurethral operations: influence 
of timing of antibiotic administration. J Clin Pathol 1984; 37:673–6.
185. Schönebeck J, Almgård LE, Boman J. Antibiotics to patients with urinary infec-
tions in connection with transurethral prostatectomy. Scand J Infect Dis 1980; 12:129–31.
186. Olsen JH, Friis-Møller A, Jensen SK, Korner B, Hvidt V . Cefotaxime for preven-
tion of infectious complications in bacteriuric men undergoing transurethral 
prostatic resection. A controlled comparison with methenamine. Scand J Urol 
Nephrol 1983; 17:299–301.
187. Holmquist B, Lundgren R. Pivmecillinam plus pivampicillin versus co-trimoxaz-
ole in patients undergoing transurethral prostate resection. Pharmatherapeutica 1984; 3:686–91.
188. Adolfsson J, Köhler C, Falck L. Norfloxacin versus trimethoprim-sulfamethoxaz-
ole. A study in patients with known bacteriuria undergoing transurethral resec-
tion of the prostate. Scand J Urol Nephrol 1989; 23:255–9.
189. Sayin Kutlu S, Aybek Z, Tekin K, et al. Is short course of antimicrobial therapy for 
asymptomatic bacteriuria before urologic surgical procedures sufficient? J Infect Dev Ctries 2012; 6:143–7.
190. Chong JT, Klausner AP , Petrossian A, et al. Pre-procedural antibiotics for endo-
scopic urological procedures: initial experience in individuals with spinal cord 
injury and asymptomatic bacteriuria. J Spinal Cord Med 2015; 38:187–92.
191. Nicolle LE. Asymptomatic bacteriuria in the elderly. Infect Dis Clin North Am 
1997; 11:647–62.
192. Kavoussi NL, Siegel JA, Viers BR, et al. Preoperative urine culture results corre-
late poorly with bacteriology of urologic prosthetic device infections. J Sex Med 2017; 14:163–8.
193. Carson CC. Penile prosthesis implantation and infection for sexual medicine so-
ciety of North America. Int J Impot Res 2001; 13(Suppl 5):S35–8.
194. Petero VG Jr, Diokno AC. Comparison of the long-term outcomes between in-
continent men and women treated with artificial urinary sphincter. J Urol 2006; 175:605–9.
195. Katz BF, Gaunay GS, Barazani Y , et al. Use of a preoperative checklist reduces risk 
of penile prosthesis infection. J Urol 2014; 192:130–5.
196. Katz DJ, Stember DS, Nelson CJ, Mulhall JP . Perioperative prevention of penile 
prosthesis infection: practice patterns among surgeons of SMSNA and ISSM. J Sex 
Med 2012; 9:1705–12; quiz 712–4.
197. Selph JP , Carson CC 3rd. Penile prosthesis infection: approaches to prevention 
and treatment. Urol Clin North Am 2011; 38:227–35.
198. Bryan DE, Mulcahy JJ, Simmons GR. Salvage procedure for infected noneroded 
artificial urinary sphincters. J Urol 2002; 168:2464–6.
199. Cai T, Verze P , Palmieri A, et al. Is preoperative assessment and treatment of 
asymptomatic bacteriuria necessary for reducing the risk of postoperative symp-tomatic urinary tract infections after urologic surgical procedures? Urology 2017; 
99:100–5.Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article/68/10/e83/5407612 by MUSC Library user on 12 November 2025

