VOLUME 2 | ISSUE 1 | MARCH 2012
http://www.kidney-international.orgOFFICIAL JOURNAL OF THE INTERNATIONAL SOCIETY OF NEPHROLOGY
KDIGO Clinical Practice Guideline for Acute Kidney Injury
KI_SuppCover_2.1.indd   1KI_SuppCover_2.1.indd   1 2/7/12   12:32 PM2/7/12   12:32 PM
KDIGO Clinical Practice Guideline for Acute Kidney Injury
Tables and Figures iv
Notice 1
Work Group Membership 2
KDIGO Board Members 3
Reference Keys 4
Abbreviations and Acronyms 5
Abstract 6
Foreword 7
Summary of Recommendation Statements 8
Section 1: Introduction and Methodology 13
Chapter 1.1: Introduction 13
Chapter 1.2: Methodology 17
Section 2: AKI Definition 19
Chapter 2.1: Definition and classification of AKI 19
Chapter 2.2: Risk assessment 23
Chapter 2.3: Evaluation and general management of patients with and at risk for AKI 25
Chapter 2.4: Clinical applications 28
Chapter 2.5: Diagnostic approach to alterations in kidney function and structure 33
Section 3: Prevention and Treatment of AKI 37
Chapter 3.1: Hemodynamic monitoring and support for prevention and management of AKI 37
Chapter 3.2: General supportive management of patients with AKI, including management of
complications42
Chapter 3.3: Glycemic control and nutritional support 43
Chapter 3.4: The use of diuretics in AKI 47
Chapter 3.5: Vasodilator therapy: dopamine, fenoldopam, and natriuretic peptides 50
Chapter 3.6: Growth factor intervention 57
Chapter 3.7: Adenosine receptor antagonists 59
Chapter 3.8: Prevention of aminoglycoside- and amphotericin-related AKI 61
Chapter 3.9: Other methods of prevention of AKI in the critically ill 66
Section 4: Contrast-induced AKI 69
Chapter 4.1: Contrast-induced AKI: definition, epidemiology, and prognosis 69
Chapter 4.2: Assessment of the population at risk for CI-AKI 72
Chapter 4.3: Nonpharmacological prevention strategies of CI-AKI 76
Chapter 4.4: Pharmacological prevention strategies of CI-AKI 80
Chapter 4.5: Effects of hemodialysis or hemofiltration 87
Section 5: Dialysis Interventions for Treatment of AKI 89
Chapter 5.1: Timing of renal replacement therapy in AKI 89
Chapter 5.2: Criteria for stopping renal replacement therapy in AKI 93
Chapter 5.3: Anticoagulation 95
Chapter 5.4: Vascular access for renal replacement therapy in AKI 101
Chapter 5.5: Dialyzer membranes for renal replacement therapy in AKI 105
Chapter 5.6: Modality of renal replacement therapy for patients with AKI 107
Chapter 5.7: Buffer solutions for renal replacement therapy in patients with AKI 111
Chapter 5.8: Dose of renal replacement therapy in AKI 113
Biographic and Disclosure Information 116
Acknowledgments 122
References 124http://www.kidney-international.org contents
&2012 KDIGOVOL 2 | SUPPLEMENT 1 | MARCH 2012

TABLES
Table 1. Implications of the strength of a recommendation 18
Table 2. Staging of AKI 19
Table 3. Comparison of RIFLE and AKIN criteria for diagnosis and classification of AKI 21
Table 4. Cross-tabulation of patients classified by RIFLE vs. AKIN 21
Table 5. Causes of AKI and diagnostic tests 22
Table 6. Causes of AKI: exposures and susceptibilities for non-specific AKI 23
Table 7. AKI diagnosis 28
Table 8. Overview of the approaches to determine baseline SCr in the application of RIFLE classification in previous
studies29
Table 9. Estimated baseline SCr 29
Table 10. AKI staging 30
Table 11. Definitions of AKI, CKD, and AKD 33
Table 12. Examples of AKI, CKD, and AKD based on GFR and increases in SCr 33
Table 13. Markers of kidney damage in AKD and CKD 35
Table 14. Integrated approach to interpret measures of kidney function and structure for diagnosis of AKI, AKD, and CKD 35
Table 15. CI-AKI risk-scoring model for percutaneous coronary intervention 73
Table 16. Additional radiological measures to reduce CI-AKI 77
Table 17. Potential applications for RRT 91
Table 18. Fluid overload and outcome in critically ill children with AKI 91
Table 19. Overview of the advantages and disadvantages of different anticoagulants in AKI patients 97
Table 20. Catheter and patient sizes 104
Table 21. Typical setting of different RRT modalities for AKI (for 70-kg patient) 107
Table 22. Theoretical advantages and disadvantages of CRRT, IHD, SLED, and PD 108
Table 23. Microbiological quality standards of different regulatory agencies 112
FIGURES
Figure 1. The RIFLE criteria for AKI 14
Figure 2. Overview of AKI, CKD, and AKD 20
Figure 3. Conceptual model for AKI 20
Figure 4. Stage-based management of AKI 25
Figure 5. Evaluation of AKI according to the stage and cause 26
Figure 6. Chronic Kidney Disease Epidemiology Collaboration cohort changes in eGFR and final eGFR corresponding to
KDIGO definition and stages of AKI34
Figure 7. GFR/SCr algorithm 34
Figure 8. Conceptual model for development and clinical course of AKI 38
Figure 9. Effect of furosemide vs. control on all-cause mortality 48
Figure 10. Effect of furosemide vs. control on need for RRT 48
Figure 11. Effect of low-dose dopamine on mortality 51
Figure 12. Effect of low-dose dopamine on need for RRT 52
Figure 13. Sample questionnaire 73
Figure 14. Risk for contrast-induced nephropathy 78
Figure 15. Bicarbonate vs. saline and risk of CI-AKI 81
Figure 16. NAC and bicarbonate vs. NAC for risk of CI-AKI 85
Figure 17. Flow-chart summary of recommendations 96
Additional information in the form of supplementary materials can be foun d online at http://www.kdigo.org/clinical_practice_guidelines/AKI.p hpcontents http://www.kidney-international.org
&2012 KDIGO
iv Kidney International Supplements (2012) 2,i v
Notice
Kidney International Supplements (2012) 2,1; doi:10.1038/kisup.2012.1
SECTION I: USE OF THE CLINICAL PRACTICE GUIDELINE
This Clinical Practice Guideline document is based upon the best information available as of
February 2011. It is designed to provide information and assist decision-making. It is notintended to deﬁne a standard of care, and should not be construed as one, nor should it beinterpreted as prescribing an exclusive course of management. Variations in practice will
inevitably and appropriately occur when clinicians take into account the needs of individual
patients, available resources, and limitations unique to an institution or type of practice. Everyhealth-care professional making use of these recommendations is responsible for evaluating theappropriateness of applying them in the setting of any particular clinical situation. Therecommendations for research contained within this document are general and do not imply aspeciﬁc protocol.
SECTION II: DISCLOSURE
Kidney Disease: Improving Global Outcomes (KDIGO) makes every effort to avoid any actual orreasonably perceived conﬂicts of interest that may arise as a result of an outside relationship or apersonal, professional, or business interest of a member of the Work Group. All members of the
Work Group are required to complete, sign, and submit a disclosure and attestation form
showing all such relationships that might be perceived or actual conﬂicts of interest. Thisdocument is updated annually and information is adjusted accordingly. All reported informationis published in its entirety at the end of this document in the Work Group members’Biographical and Disclosure Information section, and is kept on ﬁle at the National KidneyFoundation (NKF), Managing Agent for KDIGO.http://www.kidney-international.org
&2012 KDIGO
Kidney International Supplements (2012) 2,1 1
Work Group Membership
Kidney International Supplements (2012) 2,2; doi:10.1038/kisup.2012.2http://www.kidney-international.org
&2012 KDIGO
WORK GROUP CO-CHAIRS
John A Kellum, MD, FCCM, FACP
University of Pittsburgh School of MedicinePittsburgh, PANorbert Lameire, MD, PhDGhent University HospitalGhent, Belgium
WORK GROUP
Peter Aspelin, MD, PhDKarolinska University Hospital
Stockholm, Sweden
Rashad S Barsoum, MD, FRCP, FRCPE
Cairo UniversityCairo, Egypt
Emmanuel A Burdmann, MD, PhD
University of Sa ˜o Paulo Medical School
Sa˜o Paulo, Brazil
Stuart L Goldstein, MDCincinnati Children’s Hospital & Medical Center
Cincinnati, OH
Charles A Herzog, MD
Hennepin County Medical CenterMinneapolis, MN
Michael Joannidis, MD
Medical University of InnsbruckInnsbruck, Austria
Andreas Kribben, MD
University Duisburg-Essen
Essen, Germany
Andrew S Levey, MD
Tufts Medical CenterBoston, MAAlison M MacLeod, MBChB, MD, FRCPUniversity of Aberdeen
Aberdeen, United Kingdom
Ravindra L Mehta, MD, FACP, FASN, FRCP
UCSD Medical CenterSan Diego, CA
Patrick T Murray, MD, FASN, FRCPI, FJFICMI
UCD School of Medicine and Medical Science
Dublin, Ireland
Saraladevi Naicker, MBChB, MRCP, FRCP,
FCP(SA), PhDUniversity of the WitwatersrandJohannesburg, South Africa
Steven M Opal, MD
Alpert Medical School of Brown UniversityPawtucket, RI
Franz Schaefer, MD
Heidelberg University HospitalHeidelberg, Germany
Miet Schetz, MD, PhD
University of LeuvenLeuven, Belgium
Shigehiko Uchino, MD, PhD
Jikei University School of MedicineTokyo, Japan
EVIDENCE REVIEW TEAM
Tufts Center for Kidney Disease Guideline Development and Implementation,
Tufts Medical Center, Boston, MA, USA:
Katrin Uhlig, MD, MS, Project Director; Director, Guideline Development
Jose Calvo-Broce, MD, MS, Nephrology Fellow
Aneet Deo, MD, MS, Nephrology Fellow
Amy Earley, BS, Project Coordinator
In addition, support and supervision were provided by:
Ethan M Balk, MD, MPH, Program Director, Evidence Based Medicine
2 Kidney International Supplements (2012) 2,2
KDIGO Board Members
Kidney International Supplements (2012) 2,3; doi:10.1038/kisup.2012.3
Garabed Eknoyan, MD
Norbert Lameire, MD, PhD
Founding KDIGO Co-Chairs
Kai-Uwe Eckardt, MD
KDIGO Co-ChairBertram L Kasiske, MDKDIGO Co-Chair
Omar I Abboud, MD, FRCP
Sharon Adler, MD, FASNRajiv Agarwal, MDSharon P Andreoli, MDGavin J Becker, MD, FRACPFred Brown, MBA, FACHE
Daniel C Cattran, MD, FRCPC
Allan J Collins, MD, FACPRosanna Coppo, MDJosef Coresh, MD, PhDRicardo Correa-Rotter, MDAdrian Covic, MD, PhDJonathan C Craig, MBChB, MM (Clin Epi), DCH, FRACP, PhDAngel de Francisco, MD
Paul de Jong, MD, PhD
Ana Figueiredo, RN, MSc, PhDMohammed Benghanem Gharbi, MDGordon Guyatt, MD, MSc, BSc, FRCPCDavid Harris, MDLai Seong Hooi, MDEnyu Imai, MD, PhDLesley A Inker, MD, MS, FRCPMichel Jadoul, MDSimon Jenkins, MBE, FRCGPSuhnggwon Kim, MD, PhDMartin K Kuhlmann, MDNathan W Levin, MD, FACPPhilip K-T Li, MD, FRCP, FACP
Zhi-Hong Liu, MD
Pablo Massari, MDPeter A McCullough, MD, MPH, FACC, FACPRaﬁque Moosa, MDMiguel C Riella, MDAdibul Hasan Rizvi, MBBS, FRCPBernardo Rodriquez-Iturbe, MDRobert Schrier, MD
Justin Silver, MD, PhD
Marcello Tonelli, MD, SM, FRCPCYusuke Tsukamoto, MDTheodor Vogels, MSWAngela Yee-Moon Wang, MD, PhD, FRCPChristoph Wanner, MDDavid C Wheeler, MD, FRCPElena Zakharova, MD, PhD
NKF-KDIGO GUIDELINE DEVELOPMENT STAFF
Kerry Willis, PhD, Senior Vice-President for Scientiﬁc Activities
Michael Cheung, MA, Guideline Development Director
Sean Slifer, BA, Guideline Development Manager
Kidney International Supplements (2012) 2,3 3http://www.kidney-international.org
&2012 KDIGO
Reference Keys
Kidney International Supplements (2012) 2,4; doi:10.1038/kisup.2012.4
Implications
Grade* Patients Clinicians Policy
Level 1
‘‘We recommend’’Most people in your situation wouldwant the recommended course of actionand only a small proportion would not.Most patients should receive therecommended course of action.The recommendation can be evaluatedas a candidate for developing a policyor a performance measure.
Level 2‘‘We suggest’’The majority of people in your situationwould want the recommended courseof action, but many would not.Different choices will be appropriate fordifferent patients. Each patient needshelp to arrive at a management decisionconsistent with her or his values andpreferences.The recommendation is likely to requiresubstantial debate and involvementof stakeholders before policy can bedetermined.
*The additional category ‘‘Not Graded’’ was used, typically, to provide guidance based on common sense or where the topic does not allow adequate application of evidence.
The most common examples include recommendations regarding monitoring intervals, counseling, and referral to other clinical specialists. The ung raded recommendations
are generally written as simple declarative statements, but are not meant to be interpreted as being stronger recommendations than Level 1 or 2 recommendations.
Grade Quality of evidence Meaning
A High We are confident that the true effect lies close to that of the estimate of the effect.
B Moderate The true effect is likely to be close to the estimate of the effect, but there is a possibility
that it is substantially different.
C Low The true effect may be substantially different from the estimate of the effect.
D Very low The estimate of effect is very uncertain, and often will be far from the truth.
Parameter Metric units Conversion factor SI units
Amikacin (serum, plasma) mg/ml 1.708 mmol/l
Blood urea nitrogen mg/dl 0.357 mmol/l
Calcium, ionized (serum) mg/dl 0.25 mmol/l
Creatinine (serum) mg/dl 88.4 mmol/l
Creatinine clearance ml/min 0.01667 ml/s
Gentamicin (serum) mg/ml 2.09 mmol/l
Glucose mg/dl 0.0555 mmol/l
Lactate (plasma) mg/dl 0.111 mmol/l
Tobramycin (serum, plasma) mg/ml 2.139 mmol/l
Urea (plasma) mg/ml 0.167 mmol/l
Note: Metric unit /C2conversion factor = SI unit.NOMENCLATURE AND DESCRIPTION FOR RATING GUIDELINE
RECOMMENDATIONS
Within each recommendation, the strength of recommendation is indicated as Level 1 ,Level 2 ,o rNot Graded , and the quality of the
supporting evidence is shown as A,B,C,o rD.
CONVERSION FACTORS OF METRIC UNITS TO SI UNITShttp://www.kidney-international.org
&2012 KDIGO
4 Kidney International Supplements (2012) 2,4
Kidney International Supplements (2012) 2,5 5Abbreviations and Acronyms
Kidney International Supplements (2012) 2,5; doi:10.1038/kisup.2012.5
AAMI American Association of Medical
Instrumentation
ACCP American College of Chest Physicians
ACD-A Anticoagulant dextrose solution A
ACE-I Angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitor(s)ADQI Acute Dialysis Quality InitiativeAHCPR Agency for Health Care Policy and ResearchAKD Acute kidney diseases and disorders
AKI Acute kidney injury
AKIN Acute Kidney Injury NetworkANP Atrial natriuretic peptide
aPTT Activated partial thromboplastin time
ARB Angiotensin-receptor blocker(s)
ARF Acute renal failure
A R F T N A c u t eR e n a lF a i l u r eT r i a lN e t w o r kATN Acute tubular necrosis
AUC Area under the curve
BMI Body mass index
BUN Blood urea nitrogen
CDC Centers for Disease Control
CHF Congestive heart failure
CI Conﬁdence interval
CI-AKI Contrast-induced acute kidney injuryCIT Conventional insulin therapy
CKD Chronic kidney disease
CrCl Creatinine clearance
CRF Chronic renal failure
CRRT Continuous renal replacement therapyCT Computed tomography
CVC Central venous catheters
CVVH Continuous venovenous hemoﬁltrationCVVHDF Continuous venovenous hemodiaﬁltrationeCrCl Estimated creatinine clearanceEGDT Early goal-directed therapyeGFR Estimated glomerular ﬁltration rate
ERT Evidence Review Team
ESRD End-stage renal diseaseFDA Food and Drug Administration
GFR Glomerular ﬁltration rate
HDF Hemodiaﬁltration
HES HydroxyethylstarchHF Hemoﬁltration
HIT Heparin-induced thrombocytopenia
HR Hazard ratio
i.a. Intraarterial
ICU Intensive-care unit
IGF-1 Insulin-like growth factor-1IHD Intermittent hemodialysis
IIT Intensive insulin therapy
i.v. Intravenous
KDIGO Kidney Disease: Improving Global OutcomesKDOQI Kidney Disease Outcomes Quality InitiativeLOS Length of stay
MDRD Modiﬁcation of Diet in Renal DiseaseMI Myocardial infarction
MIC Minimum inhibitory concentration
MRI Magnetic resonance imaging
MW Molecular weight
NAC N-acetylcysteine
NICE-SUGAR Normoglycemia in Intensive Care Evaluation
and Survival Using Glucose AlgorithmRegulation
NKD No known kidney disease
NKF National Kidney Foundation
NSF Nephrogenic Systemic Fibrosis
OR Odds ratio
PD Peritoneal dialysis
PICARD Program to Improve Care in Acute Renal
Disease
R C T R a n d o m i z e dc o n t r o l l e dt r i a l
RIFLE Risk, Injury, Failure; Loss, End-Stage Renal
Disease
RR Relative risk
RRT Renal replacement therapy
SAFE Saline vs. Albumin Fluid Evaluation
SCr Serum creatinine
ScvO
2 Central venous oxygen saturation
SLED Sustained low-efﬁciency dialysisTCC Tunneled cuffed catheter
VISEP Efﬁcacy of Volume Substitution and Insulin
Therapy in Severe Sepsishttp://www.kidney-international.org
&2012 KDIGO
Abstract
Kidney International Supplements (2012) 2,6; doi:10.1038/kisup.2012.6
The 2011 Kidney Disease: Improving Global Outcomes (KDIGO) Clinical Practice Guideline for
Acute Kidney Injury (AKI) aims to assist practitioners caring for adults and children at risk foror with AKI, including contrast-induced acute kidney injury (CI-AKI). Guideline developmentfollowed an explicit process of evidence review and appraisal. The guideline contains chapters ondeﬁnition, risk assessment, evaluation, prevention, and treatment. Deﬁnition and staging of AKI
are based on the
Risk, Injury, Failure; Loss, End-Stage Renal Disease (RIFLE) and Acute Kidney
Injury Network (AKIN) criteria and studies on risk relationships. The treatment chapters cover
pharmacological approaches to prevent or treat AKI, and management of renal replacement forkidney failure from AKI. Guideline recommendations are based on systematic reviews of relevanttrials. Appraisal of the quality of the evidence and the strength of recommendations followed theGRADE approach. Limitations of the evidence are discussed and speciﬁc suggestions areprovided for future research.
Keywords: Clinical Practice Guideline; KDIGO; acute kidney injury; contrast-induced
nephropathy; renal replacement therapy; evidence-based recommendation
CITATION
In citing this document, the following format should be used: Kidney Disease: Improving Global
Outcomes (KDIGO) Acute Kidney Injury Work Group. KDIGO Clinical Practice Guidelinefor Acute Kidney Injury. Kidney inter., Suppl. 2012; 2: 1–138.http://www.kidney-international.org
&2012 KDIGO
6 Kidney International Supplements (2012) 2,6
Foreword
Kidney International Supplements (2012) 2,7; doi:10.1038/kisup.2012.8
It is our hope that this document will serve several useful
purposes. Our primary goal is to improve patient care. Wehope to accomplish this, in the short term, by helpingclinicians know and better understand the evidence (or lackof evidence) that determines current practice. By providingcomprehensive evidence-based recommendations, this guide-line will also help deﬁne areas where evidence is lacking and
research is needed. Helping to deﬁne a research agenda is an
often neglected, but very important, function of clinicalpractice guideline development.
We used the GRADE system to rate the strength of evidence
and the strength of recommendations. In all, there were only11 (18%) recommendations in this guideline for which theoverall quality of evidence was graded ‘A,’ whereas 20 (32.8%)were graded ‘B,’ 23 (37.7%) were graded ‘C,’ and 7 (11.5%)
were graded ‘D.’ Although there are reasons other than quality
of evidence to make a grade 1 or 2 recommendation, ingeneral, there is a correlation between the quality of overallevidence and the strength of the recommendation. Thus, therewere 22 (36.1%) recommendations graded ‘1’ and 39 (63.9%)graded ‘2.’ There were 9 (14.8%) recommendations graded‘1A,’ 10 (16.4%) were ‘1B,’ 3 (4.9%) were ‘1C,’ and 0 (0%) were‘1D.’ There were 2 (3.3%) graded ‘2A,’ 10 (16.4%) were ‘2B,’
20 (32.8%) were ‘2C,’ and 7 (11.5%) were ‘2D.’ There were
26 (29.9%) statements that were not graded.Some argue that recommendations should not be made
when evidence is weak. However, clinicians still need to makeclinical decisions in their daily practice, and they often ask,‘‘What do the experts do in this setting?’’ We opted to giveguidance, rather than remain silent. These recommendationsare often rated with a low strength of recommendation and alow strength of evidence, or were not graded. It is important
for the users of this guideline to be cognizant of this (see
Notice). In every case these recommendations are meant tobe a place for clinicians to start, not stop, their inquiries intospeciﬁc management questions pertinent to the patients theysee in daily practice.
We wish to thank the Work Group Co-Chairs, Drs John
Kellum and Norbert Lameire, along with all of the WorkGroup members who volunteered countless hours of their
time developing this guideline. We also thank the Evidence
Review Team members and staff of the National KidneyFoundation who made this project possible. Finally, we owe aspecial debt of gratitude to the many KDIGO Board membersand individuals who volunteered time reviewing the guide-line, and making very helpful suggestions.
Kai-Uwe Eckardt, MD Bertram L. Kasiske, MD
KDIGO Co-Chair KDIGO Co-Chairhttp://www.kidney-international.org
&2012 KDIGO
Kidney International Supplements (2012) 2,7 7
Summary of Recommendation Statements
Kidney International Supplements (2012) 2,8– 12; doi:10.1038/kisup.2012.7http://www.kidney-international.org
&2012 KDIGO
Section 2: AKI Definition
2.1.1: AKI is deﬁned as any of the following ( Not Graded ):
KIncrease in SCr by X0.3 mg/dl ( X26.5lmol/l) within 48 hours; or
KIncrease in SCr to X1.5 times baseline, which is known or presumed to have occurred within the prior 7 days; or
KUrine volume o0.5 ml/kg/h for 6 hours.
2.1.2: AKI is staged for severity according to the following criteria (Table 2). ( Not Graded )
2.1.3: The cause of AKI should be determined whenever possible. ( Not Graded )
2.2.1: We recommend that patients be stratiﬁed for risk of AKI according to their susceptibilities and exposures. ( 1B)
2.2.2: Manage patients according to their susceptibilities and exposures to reduce the risk of AKI (see relevant guideline
sections). ( Not Graded )
2.2.3: Test patients at increased risk for AKI with measurements of SCr and urine output to detect AKI. ( Not Graded )
Individualize frequency and duration of monitoring based on patient risk and clinical course. ( Not Graded )
2.3.1: Evaluate patients with AKI promptly to determine the cause, with special attention to reversible causes.
(Not Graded )
2.3.2: Monitor patients with AKI with measurements of SCr and urine output to stage the severity, according to
Recommendation 2.1.2. ( Not Graded )
2.3.3: Manage patients with AKI according to the stage (see Figure 4) and cause. ( Not Graded )
2.3.4: Evaluate patients 3 months after AKI for resolution, new onset, or worsening of pre-existing CKD. ( Not Graded )
KIf patients have CKD, manage these patients as detailed in the KDOQI CKD Guideline (Guidelines 7–15).
(Not Graded )
KIf patients do not have CKD, consider them to be at increased risk for CKD and care for them as detailed inthe KDOQI CKD Guideline 3 for patients at increased risk for CKD. ( Not Graded )
Section 3: Prevention and Treatment of AKI
3.1.1: In the absence of hemorrhagic shock, we suggest using isotonic crystalloids rather than colloids (albumin or
starches) as initial management for expansion of intravascular volume in patients at risk for AKI or with AKI. ( 2B)
3.1.2: We recommend the use of vasopressors in conjunction with ﬂuids in patients with vasomotor shock with, or at risk
for, AKI. ( 1C)Table 2 | Staging of AKI
Stage Serum creatinine Urine output
1 1.5– 1.9 times baseline
OR
X0.3 mg/dl ( X26.5mmol/l) increaseo0.5 ml/kg/h for 6– 12 hours
2 2.0– 2.9 times baseline o0.5 ml/kg/h for X12 hours
3 3.0 times baseline
OR
Increase in serum creatinine to X4.0 mg/dl ( X353.6 mmol/l)
OR
Initiation of renal replacement therapy
OR, In patients o18 years, decrease in eGFR to o35 ml/min per 1.73 m2o0.3 ml/kg/h for X24 hours
OR
Anuria for X12 hours
8 Kidney International Supplements (2012) 2,8 – 1 2
3.1.3: We suggest using protocol-based management of hemodynamic and oxygenation parameters to prevent development
or worsening of AKI in high-risk patients in the perioperative setting ( 2C) or in patients with septic shock ( 2C).
3.3.1: In critically ill patients, we suggest insulin therapy targeting plasma glucose 110– 149 mg/dl (6.1–8.3 mmol/l). ( 2C)
3.3.2: We suggest achieving a total energy intake of 20– 30 kcal/kg/d in patients with any stage of AKI. ( 2C)
3.3.3: We suggest to avoid restriction of protein intake with the aim of preventing or delaying initiation of RRT. ( 2D)
3.3.4: We suggest administering 0.8– 1.0 g/kg/d of protein in noncatabolic AKI patients without need for dialysis ( 2D),
1.0– 1.5 g/kg/d in patients with AKI on RRT ( 2D), and up to a maximum of 1.7 g/kg/d in patients on continuous renal
replacement therapy (CRRT) and in hypercatabolic patients. ( 2D)
3.3.5: We suggest providing nutrition preferentially via the enteral route in patients with AKI. ( 2C)
3.4.1: We recommend not using diuretics to prevent AKI. ( 1B)
3.4.2: We suggest not using diuretics to treat AKI, except in the management of volume overload. ( 2C)
3.5.1: We recommend not using low-dose dopamine to prevent or treat AKI. ( 1A)
3.5.2: We suggest not using fenoldopam to prevent or treat AKI. ( 2C)
3.5.3: We suggest not using atrial natriuretic peptide (ANP) to prevent ( 2C)o rt r e a t( 2B)A K I .
3.6.1: We recommend not using recombinant human (rh)IGF-1 to prevent or treat AKI. ( 1B)
3.7.1: We suggest that a single dose of theophylline may be given in neonates with severe perinatal asphyxia, who are at
high risk of AKI. ( 2B)
3.8.1: We suggest not using aminoglycosides for the treatment of infections unless no suitable, less nephrotoxic,
therapeutic alternatives are available. ( 2A)
3.8.2: We suggest that, in patients with normal kidney function in steady state, aminoglycosides are administered as a
single dose daily rather than multiple-dose daily treatment regimens. ( 2B)
3.8.3: We recommend monitoring aminoglycoside drug levels when treatment with multiple daily dosing is used for more
than 24 hours. ( 1A)
3.8.4: We suggest monitoring aminoglycoside drug levels when treatment with single-daily dosing is used for more than 48
hours. (2C )
3.8.5: We suggest using topical or local applications of aminoglycosides (e.g., respiratory aerosols, instilled antibiotic
beads), rather than i.v. application, when feasible and suitable. ( 2B)
3.8.6: We suggest using lipid formulations of amphotericin B rather than conventional formulations of amphotericin B. (2A)
3.8.7: In the treatment of systemic mycose s or parasitic infections, we recommend us ing azole antifungal agents and/or the
echinocandins rather than conventional amphoteri cin B, if equal therapeutic efﬁcacy can be assumed. ( 1A)
Figure 4 |Stage-based management of AKI. Shading of boxes indicates priority of action—solid shading indicates actions that are equally
appropriate at all stages whereas graded shading indicates increasing priority as intensity increases. AKI, acute kidney injury; ICU, intensive-
care unit.
Kidney International Supplements (2012) 2, 8–12 9summary of recommendation statements
3.9.1: We suggest that off-pump coronary artery bypass graft surgery not be selected solely for the purpose of reducing
perioperative AKI or need for RRT. ( 2C)
3.9.2: We suggest not using NAC to prevent AKI in critically ill patients with hypotension. ( 2D)
3.9.3: We recommend not using oral or i.v. NA C for prevention of postsurgical AKI. ( 1A)
Section 4: Contrast-induced AKI
4.1: Deﬁne and stage AKI after administration of intravascular contrast media as per Recommendations 2.1.1–2.1.2.
(Not Graded )
4.1.1: In individuals who develop changes in kidney function after administration of intravascular contrast
media, evaluate for CI-AKI as well as for other possible causes of AKI. ( Not Graded )
4.2.1: Assess the risk for CI-AKI and, in particular, screen for pre-existing impairment of kidney function in all patients
who are considered for a procedure that requires intravascular (i.v. or i.a.) administration of iodinated contrast
medium. ( Not Graded )
4.2.2: Consider alternative imaging methods in patients at increased risk for CI-AKI. ( Not Graded )
4.3.1: Use the lowest possible dose of contrast medium in patients at risk for CI-AKI. ( Not Graded )
4.3.2: We recommend using either iso-osmolar or low-osmolar iodinated contrast media, rather than high-osmolar
iodinated contrast media in patients at increased risk of CI-AKI. ( 1B)
4.4.1: We recommend i.v. volume expansion with either isotonic sodium chloride or sodium bicarbonate solutions,
rather than no i.v. volume expansion, in patients at increased risk for CI-AKI. ( 1A)
4.4.2: We recommend not using oral ﬂuids alone in patients at increased risk of CI-AKI. ( 1C)
4.4.3: We suggest using oral NAC, together with i.v. isotonic crystalloids, in patients at increased risk of CI-AKI. ( 2D)
4.4.4: We suggest not using theophylline to prevent CI-AKI. ( 2C)
4.4.5: We recommend not using fenoldopam to prevent CI-AKI. ( 1B)
4.5.1: We suggest not using prophylactic intermittent hemodialysis (IHD) or hemoﬁltration (HF) for contrast-media
removal in patients at increased risk for CI-AKI. ( 2C)
Section 5: Dialysis Interventions for Treatment of AKI
5.1.1: Initiate RRT emergently when life-threatening changes in ﬂuid, electrolyte, and acid-base balance exist.
(Not Graded )
5.1.2: Consider the broader clinical context, the presence of conditions that can be modiﬁed with RRT, and trends of
laboratory tests—rather than single BUN and creatinine thresholds alone—when making the decision to startRRT. ( Not Graded )
5.2.1: Discontinue RRT when it is no longer required, either because intrinsic kidney function has recovered to the point that
it is adequate to meet patient needs, or because RRT is no longer consistent with the goals of care. ( Not Graded )
5.2.2: We suggest not using diuretics to enhance kidney funct ion recovery, or to reduce the duration or frequency of RRT. ( 2B)
5.3.1: In a patient with AKI requiring RRT, base the decision to use anticoagulation for RRT on assessment of the patient’s
potential risks and beneﬁts from anticoagulation (see Figure 17). ( Not Graded )
5.3.1.1: We recommend using anticoagulation during RRT in AKI if a patient does not have an increased
bleeding risk or impaired coagulation and is not already receiving systemic anticoagulation. ( 1B)
5.3.2: For patients without an increased bleeding risk or impaired coagulation and not already receiving effective
systemic anticoagulation, we suggest the following:
5.3.2.1: For anticoagulation in intermittent RRT, we recommend using either unfractionated or low-molecular-
weight heparin, rather than other anticoagulants. (1C)
5.3.2.2: For anticoagulation in CRRT, we suggest using regional citrate anticoagulation rather than heparin in
patients who do not have contraindications for citrate. (2B)
5.3.2.3: For anticoagulation during CRRT in patients who have contraindications for citrate, we suggest using
either unfractionated or low-molecular-weight heparin, rather than other anticoagulants. (2C)
10 Kidney International Supplements (2012) 2,8 – 1 2summary of recommendation statements
5.3.3: For patients with increased bleeding risk who are not receiving anticoagulation, we suggest the following for
anticoagulation during RRT:
5.3.3.1: We suggest using regional citrate anticoagulation, rather than no anticoagulation, during CRRT in
a patient without contraindications for citrate. (2C)
5.3.3.2: We suggest avoiding regional heparinization during CRRT in a patient with increased risk of
bleeding. (2C)Impaired 
coagulation?  Proceed without  
anticoagulation  Yes 
Underlying 
condition requires 
systemic 
anticoagulation?  Use anticoagulation 
adapted to this 
condition  Yes No 
Choose RRT 
Modality  CRRT Intermittent RRT  
Contraindication 
to Citrate?  
Increased 
Bleeding Risk?  Regional Citrate 
Anticoagulation  No 
Heparin  
Proceed without 
anticoagulation  Yes Yes 
No 
Increased 
Bleeding 
Risk?  Heparin  
Proceed without 
anticoagulationYes No Rec 
5.3.1.1 
Recs 
5.3.2.2 
& 
5.3.3.1 
Rec 
5.3.2.3 
Rec 
5.3.2.1 Rec 
5.3.3.2 No 
Figure 17 |Flow-chart summary of recommendations. Heparin includes low-molecular-weight or unfractionated heparin.
CRRT, continuous renal replacement therapy; RRT, renal replacement therapy.
Kidney International Supplements (2012) 2, 8–12 11summary of recommendation statements
5.3.4: In a patient with heparin-induced thrombocytopenia (HIT), all heparin must be stopped and we recommend
using direct thrombin inhibitors (such as argatroban) or Factor Xa inhibitors (such as danaparoid or
fondaparinux) rather than other or no anticoagulation during RRT. ( 1A)
5.3.4.1: In a patient with HIT who does not have severe liver failure, we suggest using argatroban rather than
other thrombin or Factor Xa inhibitors during RRT. ( 2C)
5.4.1: We suggest initiating RRT in patients with AKI via an uncuffed nontunneled dialysis catheter, rather than a
tunneled catheter. ( 2D)
5.4.2: When choosing a vein for insertion of a dialysis catheter in patients with AKI, consider these preferences
(Not Graded ):
KFirst choice: right jugular vein;
KSecond choice: femoral vein;
KThird choice: left jugular vein;
KLast choice: subclavian vein with preference for the dominant side.
5.4.3: We recommend using ultrasound guidance for dialysis catheter insertion. ( 1A)
5.4.4: We recommend obtaining a chest radiograph promptly after placement and before ﬁrst use of an internal jugular
or subclavian dialysis catheter. ( 1B)
5.4.5: We suggest not using topical antibiotics over the skin insertion site of a nontunneled dialysis catheter in ICU
patients with AKI requiring RRT. ( 2C)
5.4.6: We suggest not using antibiotic locks for prevention of catheter-related infections of nontunneled dialysis
catheters in AKI requiring RRT. ( 2C)
5.5.1: We suggest to use dialyzers with a biocompatible membrane for IHD and CRRT in patients with AKI. ( 2C)
5.6.1: Use continuous and intermittent RRT as complementary therapies in AKI patients. ( Not Graded )
5.6.2: We suggest using CRRT, rather than standard intermittent RRT, for hemodynamically unstable patients. ( 2B)
5.6.3: We suggest using CRRT, rather than intermittent RRT, for AKI patients with acute brain injury or other causes of
increased intracranial pressure or generalized brain edema. ( 2B)
5.7.1: We suggest using bicarbonate, rather than lactate, as a buffer in dialysate and replacement ﬂuid for RRT in
patients with AKI. ( 2C)
5.7.2: We recommend using bicarbonate, rather than lactate, as a buffer in dialysate and replacement ﬂuid for RRT
in patients with AKI and circulatory shock. ( 1B)
5.7.3: We suggest using bicarbonate, rather than lactate, as a buffer in dialysate and replacement ﬂuid for RRT in
patients with AKI and liver failure and/or lactic acidemia. ( 2B)
5.7.4: We recommend that dialysis ﬂuids and replacement ﬂuids in patients with AKI, at a minimum, comply with
American Association of Medical Instrumentation (AAMI) standards regarding contamination with bacteria andendotoxins. ( 1B)
5.8.1: The dose of RRT to be delivered should be prescribed before starting each session of RRT. ( Not Graded )W e
recommend frequent assessment of the actual delivered dose in order to adjust the prescription. ( 1B)
5.8.2: Provide RRT to achieve the goals of electrolyte, acid-base, solute, and ﬂuid balance that will meet the patient’s
needs. ( Not Graded )
5.8.3: We recommend delivering a Kt/V of 3.9 per week when using intermittent or extended RRT in AKI. ( 1A)
5.8.4: We recommend delivering an efﬂuent volume of 20–25 ml/kg/h for CRRT in AKI (1A). This will usually require
a higher prescription of efﬂuent volume. ( Not Graded )
12 Kidney International Supplements (2012) 2,8 – 1 2summary of recommendation statements
Section 1: Introduction and Methodology
Kidney International Supplements (2012) 2,13– 18; doi:10.1038/kisup.2011.31
Chapter 1.1: Introduction
The concept of acute renal failure (ARF) has undergone
signiﬁcant re-examination in recent years. Mounting evi-dence suggests that acute, relatively mild injury to the kidney
or impairment of kidney function, manifest by changes in
urine output and blood chemistries, portend serious clinicalconsequences.
1–5Traditionally, most reviews and textbook
chapters emphasize the most severe reduction in kidneyfunction, with severe azotemia and often with oliguria oranuria. It has only been in the past few years that moderatedecreases of kidney function have been recognized aspotentially important, in the critically ill,
2and in studies
on contrast-induced nephropathy.4
Glomerular filtration rate and serum creatinine
The glomerular ﬁltration rate (GFR) is widely accepted as thebest overall index of kidney function in health and disease.However, GFR is difﬁcult to measure and is commonlyestimated from the serum level of endogenous ﬁltration
markers, such as creatinine. Recently, Chertow et al.
1found
that an increase of serum creatinine (SCr) of 40.3 mg/dl
(426.5mmol/l) was independently associated with mortality.
Similarly, Lassnigg et al.3saw, in a cohort of patients who
underwent cardiac surgery, that either an increase of SCr
X0.5 mg/dl ( X44.2mmol/l) or a decrease 40.3 mg/dl
(426.5mmol/l) was associated with worse survival. The
reasons why small alterations in SCr lead to increases in
hospital mortality are not entirely clear. Possible explanations
include the untoward effects of decreased kidney functionsuch as volume overload, retention of uremic compounds,acidosis, electrolyte disorders, increased risk for infection,and anemia.
6Although, these changes in SCr could simply be
colinear with unmeasured variables that lead to increasedmortality, multiple attempts to control for known clinicalvariables has led to the consistent conclusion that decreased
kidney function is independently associated with outcome.
Furthermore, more severe reductions in kidney function tendto be associated with even worse outcome as compared tomilder reductions.
Oliguria and anuria
Although urine output is both a reasonably sensitivefunctional index for the kidney as well as a biomarker of
tubular injury, the relationship between urine output and
GFR, and tubular injury is complex. For example, oliguriamay be more profound when tubular function is intact.Volume depletion and hypotension are profound stimuli forvasopressin secretion. As a consequence the distal tubules andcollecting ducts become fully permeable to water. Concen-
trating mechanisms in the inner medulla are also aided
by low ﬂow through the loops of Henle and thus, urinevolume is minimized and urine concentration maximized(4500 m Osmol/kg). Conversely, when the tubules are
injured, maximal concentrating ability is impaired and urinevolume may even be normal (i.e., nonoliguric renal failure).Analysis of the urine to determine tubular function has along history in clinical medicine. Indeed, a high urine
osmolality coupled with a low urine sodium in the face of
oliguria and azotemia is strong evidence of intact tubularfunction. However, this should not be interpreted as‘‘benign’’ or even prerenal azotemia. Intact tubular function,particularly early on, may be seen with various forms of renaldisease (e.g., glomerulonephritis). Sepsis, the most commoncondition associated with ARF in the intensive-care unit(ICU)
7may alter renal function without any characteristic
changes in urine indices.8,9Automatically classifying these
abnormalities as ‘‘prerenal’’ will undoubtedly lead toincorrect management decisions. Classiﬁcation as ‘‘benignazotemia’’ or ‘‘acute renal success’’ is not consistent withavailable evidence. Finally, although severe oliguria and evenanuria may result from renal tubular damage, it can also becaused by urinary tract obstruction and by total arterial orvenous occlusion. These conditions will result in rapid and
irreversible damage to the kidney and require prompt
recognition and management.
Acute tubular necrosis (ATN)
When mammalian kidneys are subjected to prolonged warm
ischemia followed by reperfusion, there is extensive necrosis
destroying the proximal tubules of the outer stripe of themedulla, and the proximal convoluted tubules becomenecrotic as well.
10Distal nephron involvement in these
animal experiments is minimal, unless medullary oxygena-tion is speciﬁcally targeted.
11Although these animals develop
severe ARF, as noted by Rosen and Heyman, not much elseresembles the clinical syndrome in humans.
12Indeed these
authors correctly point out that the term ‘‘acute tubularnecrosis does not accurately reﬂect the morphologicalchanges in this condition’’ .
12Instead, the term ATN is used
to describe a clinical situation in which there is adequaterenal perfusion to largely maintain tubular integrity, but nothttp://www.kidney-international.org chapter 1.1
&2012 KDIGO
Kidney International Supplements (2012) 2, 13–18 13
to sustain glomerular ﬁltration. Data from renal biopsies in
patients with ATN dating back to the 1950s13conﬁrm the
limited parenchymal compromise in spite of severe organdysfunction.
12Thus, the syndrome of ATN has very little to
do with the animal models traditionally used to study it.More recently, investigators have emphasized the role ofendothelial dysfunction, coagulation abnormalities, systemicinﬂammation, endothelial dysfunction, and oxidative stress
in causing renal injury, particularly in the setting of
sepsis.
14,15True ATN does, in fact, occur. For example,
patients with arterial catastrophes (ruptured aneurysms,acute dissection) can suffer prolonged periods of warmischemia just like animal models. However, these casescomprise only a small fraction of patients with AKI, andironically, these patients are often excluded from studiesseeking to enroll patients with the more common clinical
syndrome known as ATN.
ARF
In a recent review, Eknoyan notes that the ﬁrst description of
ARF, then termed ischuria renalis , was by William Heberden
in 1802.16At the beginning of the twentieth century, ARF,
then named Acute Bright’s disease , was well described in
William Osler’s Textbook for Medicine (1909), as a consequence
of toxic agents, pregnancy, burns, trauma, or operations on thekidneys. During the First World War the syndrome was named‘‘war nephritis’’ ,
17and was reported in several publications.
The syndrome was forgotten until the Second World War,when Bywaters and Beall published their classical paper oncrush syndrome.
18However, it is Homer W. Smith who is
credited for the introduction of the term ‘‘acute renal failure’’ ,in a chapter on ‘‘Acute renal failure related to traumatic
injuries’’ in his textbook The kidney-structure and function in
health and disease (1951). Unfortunately, a precise biochemical
deﬁnition of ARF was never proposed and, until recently, there
was no consensus on the diagnostic criteria or clinicaldeﬁnition of ARF, resulting in multiple different deﬁnitions.A recent survey revealed the use of at least 35 deﬁnitions in theliterature.
19This state of confusion has given rise to wide
variation in reported incidence and clinical signiﬁcance of
ARF. Depending on the deﬁnition used, ARF has been
reported to affect from 1% to 25% of ICU patients and haslead to mortality rates from 15– 60%.
7,20,21
RIFLE criteria
The Acute Dialysis Quality Initiative (ADQI) group developeda system for diagnosis and classiﬁcation of a broad range ofacute impairment of kidney function through a broad
consensus of experts.
22The characteristics of this system are
summarized in Figure 1. The acronym RIFLE stands for the
increasing severity classes Risk, Injury, and Failure; and the two
outcome classes, Loss and End-Stage Renal Disease (ESRD).
The three severity grades are deﬁned on the basis of thechanges in SCr or urine output where the worst of eachcriterion is used. The two outcome criteria, Loss and ESRD,are deﬁned by the duration of loss of kidney function.AKI: acute kidney injury/impairment
Importantly, by deﬁning the syndrome of acute changes inrenal function more broadly, RIFLE criteria move beyondARF. The term ‘‘acute kidney injury/impairment’’ has beenproposed to encompass the entire spectrum of the syndromefrom minor changes in markers of renal function torequirement for renal replacement therapy (RRT).
23Thus,
the concept of AKI, as deﬁned by RIFLE creates a newparadigm. AKI is not ATN, nor is it renal failure. Instead, itencompasses both and also includes other, less severeconditions. Indeed, as a syndrome, it includes patientswithout actual damage to the kidney but with functionalimpairment relative to physiologic demand. Including such
patients in the classiﬁcation of AKI is conceptually attractivebecause these are precisely the patients that may beneﬁt from
early intervention. However, it means that AKI includes both
injury and/or impairment . Rather than focusing exclusively
on patients with renal failure or on those who receive dialysisor on those that have a clinical syndrome deﬁned bypathology, which is usually absent (ATN), the strongassociation of AKI with hospital mortality demands that wechange the way we think about this disorder. In a study byHoste et al .,
2only 14% of patients reaching RIFLE ‘‘F’’
received RRT, yet these patients experienced a hospitalmortality rate more than ﬁve times that of the same ICUpopulation without AKI. Is renal support underutilized ordelayed? Are there other supportive measures that should beemployed for these patients? Sustained AKI leads to profoundalterations in ﬂuid, electrolyte, acid-base and hormonalregulation. AKI results in abnormalities in the centralnervous, immune, and coagulation systems. Many patients
Figure 1 |The RIFLE criteria for AKI. ARF, acute renal failure; GFR,
glomerular filtration rate; Screat, serum creatinine concentration;
UO, urine output. Reprinted from Bellomo R, Ronco C, Kellum JA,et al . Acute renal failure—definition, outcome measures, animal
models, fluid therapy and information technology needs: theSecond International Consensus Conference of the Acute DialysisQuality Initiative (ADQI) Group. Crit Care 2004; 8: R204-212 withpermission from Bellomo R et al .;
22accessed http://ccforum.com/
content/8/4/R204
14 Kidney International Supplements (2012) 2, 13–18chapter 1.1
with AKI already have multisystem organ failure. What is the
incremental inﬂuence of AKI on remote organ function andhow does it affect outcome? A recent study by Levy et al.
examined outcomes for over 1000 patients enrolled in thecontrol arms of two large sepsis trials.
24Early improvement
(within 24 hours) in cardiovascular ( P¼0.0010), renal
(Po0.0001), or respiratory ( P¼0.0469) function was
signiﬁcantly related to survival. This study suggests that
outcomes for patients with severe sepsis in the ICU are
closely related to early resolution of AKI. While rapidresolution of AKI may simply be a marker of a goodprognosis, it may also indicate a window of therapeuticopportunity to improve outcome in such patients.
Validation studies using RIFLE
As of early 2010, over half a million patients have beenstudied to evaluate the RIFLE criteria as a means ofclassifying patients with AKI.
25–28Large series from the
USA,28Europe,29,30and Australia,25each including several
thousand patients, have provided a consistent picture. AKIdeﬁned by RIFLE is associated with signiﬁcantly decreasedsurvival and furthermore, increasing severity of AKI deﬁnedby RIFLE stage leads to increased risk of death.
An early study from Uchino et al . focused on the
predictive ability of the RIFLE classiﬁcation in a cohortof 20 126 patients admitted to a teaching hospital for424 hours over a 3-year period.
5The authors used an
electronic laboratory database to classify patients intoRIFLE-R, I, and F and followed them to hospital dischargeor death. Nearly 10% of patients achieved a maximumRIFLE-R, 5% I, and 3.5% F. There was a nearly linearincrease in hospital mortality with increasing RIFLE class,with patients at R having more than three times the mortalityrate of patients without AKI. Patients with I had close totwice the mortality of R and patients with F had 10 times
the mortality rate of hospitalized patients without AKI.
The investigators performed multivariate logistic regressionanalysis to test whether RIFLE classiﬁcation was anindependent predictor of hospital mortality. They foundthat class R carried an odds ratio of hospital mortality of 2.5,I of 5.4, and F of 10.1.
Ali et al . studied the incidence of AKI in Northern
Scotland, a geographical population base of 523 390. The
incidence of AKI was 2147 per million population.
31Sepsis
was a precipitating factor in 47% of patients. RIFLE
classiﬁcation was useful for predicting recovery of renalfunction ( Po0.001), requirement for RRT ( Po0.001), length
of hospital stay for survivors (Po0.001), and in-hospitalmortality ( P¼0.035). Although no longer statistically
signiﬁcant, subjects with AKI had a high mortality at 3 and6 months as well.
More recently, the Acute Kidney Injury Network (AKIN),
an international network of AKI researchers, organized asummit of nephrology and critical care societies from aroundthe world. The group endorsed the RIFLE criteria witha small modiﬁcation to include small changes in SCr(X0.3 mg/dl or X26.5mmol/l) when they occur within a
48-hour period.
23Two recent studies examining large
databases in the USA28and Europe29validated these
modiﬁed criteria. Thakar et al. found that increased severity
of AKI was associated with an increased risk of deathindependent of comorbidity.
28Patients with Stage 1
(X0.3 mg/dl or X26.5mmol/l) increase in SCr but less than
a two-fold increase had an odds ratio of 2.2; with Stage 2
(corresponding to RIFLE-I), there was an odds ratio of 6.1;
and in Stage 3 (RIFLE-F), an odds ratio of 8.6 for hospitalmortality was calculated. An additional modiﬁcation to theRIFLE criteria has been proposed for pediatric patients inorder to better classify small children with acute-on-chronicdisease.
32
Limitations to current definitions for AKI
Unfortunately, the existing criteria—while extremely usefuland widely validated—are still limited. First, despite efforts tostandardize the deﬁnition and classiﬁcation of AKI, there is
still inconsistency in application.
26,27A minority of studies
have included urinary output criteria despite its apparent
ability to identify additional cases6,29and many studies have
excluded patients whose initial SCr is already elevated.Preliminary data from a 20 000-patient database from theUniversity of Pittsburgh suggests that roughly a third of AKIcases are community-acquired
33and many cases may be
missed by limiting analysis to documented increases in SCr.
Indeed, the majority of cases of AKI in the developing world
are likely to be community-acquired. Thus, few studies canprovide accurate incidence data. An additional problemrelates to the limitations of SCr and urine output fordetecting AKI. In the future, biomarkers of renal cell injurymay identify additional patients with AKI and may identifythe majority of patients at an earlier stage.
Rationale for a guideline on AKI
AKI is a global problem and occurs in the community, in thehospital where it is common on medical, surgical, pediatric,and oncology wards, and in ICUs. Irrespective of its nature,AKI is a predictor of immediate and long-term adverseoutcomes. AKI is more prevalent in (and a signiﬁcant riskfactor for) patients with chronic kidney disease (CKD).Individuals with CKD are especially susceptible to AKI
which, in turn, may act as a promoter of progression of the
underlying CKD. The burden of AKI may be most signiﬁcantin developing countries
34,35with limited resources for the
care of these patients once the disease progresses to kidneyfailure necessitating RRT. Addressing the unique circum-stances and needs of developing countries, especially in thedetection of AKI in its early and potentially reversible stagesto prevent its progression to kidney failure requiring dialysis,
is of paramount importance.
Research over the past decade has identiﬁed numerous
preventable risk factors for AKI and the potential of
improving their management and outcomes. Unfortunately,these are not widely known and are variably practiced
Kidney International Supplements (2012) 2, 13–18 15chapter 1.1
worldwide, resulting in lost opportunities to improve the care
and outcomes of patients with AKI. Importantly, there is nounifying approach to the diagnosis and care of these patients.There is a worldwide need to recognize, detect, and interveneto circumvent the need for dialysis and to improve outcomesof AKI. The difﬁculties and disadvantages associated with anincreasing variation in management and treatment ofdiseases that were ampliﬁed in the years after the Second
World War, led in 1989 to the creation in the USA of the
Agency for Health Care Policy and Research (now the Agencyfor Healthcare Research and Quality). This agency wascreated to provide objective, science-based information toimprove decision making in health-care delivery. A majorcontribution of this agency was the establishment of asystematic process for developing evidence-based guidelines.It is now well accepted that rigorously developed, evidence-
based guidelines, when implemented, have improved quality,
cost, variability, and outcomes.
36,37
Realizing that there is an increasing prevalence of acute
(and chronic) kidney disease worldwide and that thecomplications and problems of patients with kidney diseaseare universal, Kidney Disease: Improving Global Outcomes(KDIGO), a nonproﬁt foundation, was established in 2003‘‘to improve the care and outcomes of kidney disease patients
worldwide through promoting coordination, collaboration,
and integration of initiatives to develop and implementclinical practice guidelines’’ .
38
Besides developing guidelines on a number of other
important areas of nephrology, the Board of Directorsof KDIGO quickly realized that there is room for improvinginternational cooperation in the development, dissemi-nation, and implementation of clinical practice guide-
lines in the ﬁeld of AKI. At its meeting in December of
2006, the KDIGO Board of Directors determined that thetopic of AKI meets the criteria for developing clinical practiceguidelines.These criteria were formulated as follows:
KAKI is common.
KAKI imposes a heavy burden of illness (morbidity andmortality).
KThe cost per person of managing AKI is high.
KAKI is amenable to early detection and potential prevention.
KThere is considerable variability in practice to prevent,diagnose, treat, and achieve outcomes of AKI.
KClinical practice guidelines in the field have the potentialto reduce variations, improve outcomes, and reduce costs.
KFormal guidelines do not exist on this topic.
Summary
Small changes in kidney function in hospitalized patients areimportant and associated with signiﬁcant changes in short-and long-term outcomes. The shift of terminology from ATNand ARF to AKI has been well received by the research andclinical communities. RIFLE/AKIN criteria provide a uni-
form deﬁnition of AKI, and have become the standard for
diagnostic criteria. AKI severity grades represent patientgroups with increasing severity of illness as illustrated by anincreasing proportion of patients treated with RRT, andincreasing mortality. Thus, AKI as deﬁned by the RIFLEcriteria is now recognized as an important syndrome,alongside other syndromes such as acute coronary syndrome,acute lung injury, and severe sepsis and septic shock. The
RIFLE/AKIN classiﬁcation for AKI is quite analogous to the
Kidney Disease Outcomes Quality Initiative (KDOQI) forCKD staging, which is well known to correlate diseaseseverity with cardiovascular complications and other mor-bidities.
39As CKD stages have been linked to speciﬁc
treatment recommendations, which have proved extremelyuseful in managing this disease,
39we have developed
recommendations for evaluation and management of
patients with AKI using this stage-based approach.
16 Kidney International Supplements (2012) 2, 13–18chapter 1.1
Chapter 1.2: Methodology
INTRODUCTION
This chapter provides a very brief summary of the methods
used to develop this guideline. Detailed methods are
provided in Appendix F. The overall aim of the project wasto create a clinical practice guideline with recommendationsfor AKI using an evidence-based approach. After topics andrelevant clinical questions were identiﬁed, the pertinentscientiﬁc literature on those topics was systematicallysearched and summarized.
Group member selection and meeting process
The KDIGO Co-Chairs appointed the Co-Chairs of the WorkGroup, who then assembled the Work Group to be responsible
for the development of the guideline. The Work Group consisted
of domain experts, including individuals with expertise innephrology, critical care medicine, internal medicine, pediatrics,cardiology, radiology, infectious diseases and epidemiology. For
support in evidence review, expertise in methods, and guidelinedevelopment, the NKF contracted with the Evidence ReviewTeam (ERT) based primarily at the Tufts Center for KidneyDisease Guideline Development and Implementation at Tufts
Medical Center in Boston, Massachusetts, USA. The ERT
consisted of physician-methodolo gists with expertise in nephrol-
ogy and internal medicine, and research associates and assistants.The ERT instructed and advised Work Group members in allsteps of literature review, critical literature appraisal, andguideline development. The Work Group and the ERTcollaborated closely throughout the project. The Work Group,KDIGO Co-Chairs, ERT, liaisons, and NKF support staff met for
four 2-day meetings for training in the guideline development
process, topic discussion, and consensus development.
Evidence selection, appraisal, and presentation
We ﬁrst deﬁned the topics and goals for the guideline andidentiﬁed key clinical questions for review. The ERTperformed literature searches, organized abstract and articlescreening, coordinated methodological and analytic processesof the report, deﬁned and standardized the search methodol-ogy, performed data extraction, and summarized theevidence. The Work Group members reviewed all includedarticles, data extraction forms, summary tables, and evidence
proﬁles for accuracy and completeness. The four major topic
areas of interest for AKI included: i) deﬁnition andclassiﬁcation; ii) prevention; iii) pharmacologic treatment;and iv) RRT. Populations of interest were those at risk forAKI (including those after intravascular contrast-mediaexposure, aminoglycosides, and amphotericin) and thosewith or at risk for AKI with a focus on patients with sepsis ortrauma, receiving critical care, or undergoing cardiothoracicsurgery. We excluded studies on AKI from rhabdomyolysis,speciﬁc infections, and poisoning or drug overdose. Overall,we screened 18 385 citations.
Outcome selection judgments, values, and preferences
We limited outcomes to those important for decision making,including development of AKI, need for or dependence onRRT, and all-cause mortality. When weighting the evidenceacross different outcomes, we selected as the ‘‘crucial’’ outcomethat which weighed most heavily in the assessment of the
overall quality of evidence. Values and preferences articulated
by the Work Group included: i) a desire to be inclusive interms of meeting criteria for AKI; ii) a progressive approach torisk and cost such that, as severity increased, the group putgreater value on possible effectiveness of strategies, butmaintained high value for avoidance of harm; iii) intent toguide practice but not limit future research.
Grading the quality of evidence and the strength of
recommendations
The grading approach followed in this guideline is adopted
from the GRADE system.40,41The strength of each recom-
mendation is rated as level 1 which means ‘‘strong’’ or level 2which means ‘‘weak’’ or discretionary. The wording corres-ponding to a level 1 recommendation is ‘‘We recommend y
should’’ and implies that most patients should receive thecourse of action. The wording for a level 2 recommendationis ‘‘We suggest ymight’’ which implies that different choices
will be appropriate for different patients, with the suggestedcourse of action being a reasonable choice in many patients.In addition, each statement is assigned a grade for the qualityof the supporting evidence, A (high), B (moderate), C (low),or D (very low). Table 1 shows the implications of the
guideline grades and describes how the strength of the
recommendations should be interpreted by guideline users.
Furthermore, on topics that cannot be subjected to
systematic evidence review, the Work Group could issuestatements that are not graded. Typically, these provideguidance that is based on common sense, e.g., reminders ofthe obvious and/or recommendations that are not sufﬁcientlyspeciﬁc enough to allow the application of evidence. The
GRADE system is best suited to evaluate evidence on
comparative effectiveness. Some of our most importantguideline topics involve diagnosis and staging or AKI, andhere the Work Group chose to provide ungraded statements.These statements are indirectly supported by evidence on riskrelationships and resulted from unanimous consensus of theWork Group. Thus, the Work Group feels they should not beviewed as weaker than graded recommendations.http://www.kidney-international.org chapter 1.2
&2012 KDIGO
Kidney International Supplements (2012) 2, 13–18 17
SPONSORSHIP
KDIGO gratefully acknowledges the following sponsors that
make our initiatives possible: Abbott, Amgen, Belo Founda-
tion, Coca-Cola Company, Dole Food Company, Genzyme,
Hoffmann-LaRoche, JC Penney, NATCO—The Organizationfor Transplant Professionals, NKF—Board of Directors,Novartis, Robert and Jane Cizik Foundation, Shire,Transwestern Commercial Services, and Wyeth. KDIGO issupported by a consortium of sponsors and no funding isaccepted for the development of speciﬁc guidelines.
DISCLAIMER
While every effort is made by the publishers, editorial board,and ISN to see that no inaccurate or misleading data, opinionor statement appears in this Journal, they wish to make it clearthat the data and opinions appearing in the articles andadvertisements herein are the responsibility of the contributor,copyright holder, or advertiser concerned. Accordingly, thepublishers and the ISN, the editorial board and their respective
employers, ofﬁce and agents accept no liability whatsoever for
the consequences of any such inaccurate or misleading data,opinion or statement. While every effort is made to ensure thatdrug doses and other quantities are presented accurately,readers are advised that new methods and techniquesinvolving drug usage, and described within this Journal,should only be followed in conjunction with the drugmanufacturer’s own published literature.
SUPPLEMENTARY MATERIAL
Appendix F: Detailed Methods for Guideline Development.
Supplementary material is linked to the online version of the paper at
http://www.kdigo.org/clinical_practice_guidelines/AKI.phpTable 1 | Implications of the strength of a recommendation
Implications
Grade* Patients Clinicians Policy
Level 1
‘‘We recommend’’Most people in your situationwould want the recommendedcourse of action and only asmall proportion would not.Most patients should receive therecommended course of action.The recommendation can be evaluated asa candidate for developing a policy or aperformance measure.
Level 2‘‘We suggest’’The majority of people in yoursituation would want therecommended course of action,but many would not.Different choices will be appropriate fordifferent patients. Each patient needs help toarrive at a management decision consistentwith her or his values and preferences.The recommendation is likely to requiresubstantial debate and involvement ofstakeholders before policy can bedetermined.
18
Kidney International Supplements (2012) 2, 13–18chapter 1.2
Section 2: AKI Definition
Kidney International Supplements (2012) 2,19– 36; doi:10.1038/kisup.2011.32
Chapter 2.1: Definition and classification of AKI
INTRODUCTION
AKI is one of a number of conditions that affect kidney
structure and function. AKI is deﬁned by an abrupt decreasein kidney function that includes, but is not limited to, ARF. Itis a broad clinical syndrome encompassing various etiologies,including speciﬁc kidney diseases (e.g., acute interstitial
nephritis, acute glomerular and vasculitic renal diseases);
non-speciﬁc conditions (e.g, ischemia, toxic injury); as wellas extrarenal pathology (e.g., prerenal azotemia, and acutepostrenal obstructive nephropathy)—see Chapters 2.2 and2.3 for further discussion. More than one of these conditionsmay coexist in the same patient and, more importantly,epidemiological evidence supports the notion that even mild,reversible AKI has important clinical consequences, including
increased risk of death.
2,5Thus, AKI can be thought of more
like acute lung injury or acute coronary syndrome.
Furthermore, because the manifestations and clinical con-sequences of AKI can be quite similar (even indistinguish-able) regardless of whether the etiology is predominantlywithin the kidney or predominantly from outside stresses onthe kidney, the syndrome of AKI encompasses both directinjury to the kidney as well as acute impairment of function.
Since treatments of AKI are dependent to a large degree onthe underlying etiology, this guideline will focus on speciﬁcdiagnostic approaches. However, since general therapeuticand monitoring recommendations can be made regarding allforms of AKI, our approach will be to begin with generalmeasures.
Definition and staging of AKI
AKI is common, harmful, and potentially treatable. Evena minor acute reduction in kidney function has an adverseprognosis. Early detection and treatment of AKI mayimprove outcomes. Two similar deﬁnitions based on SCrand urine output (RIFLE and AKIN) have been proposed andvalidated. There is a need for a single deﬁnition for practice,research, and public health.
2.1.1: AKI is deﬁned as any of the following ( Not Graded ):
KIncrease in SCr by X0.3 mg/dl ( X26.5 lmol/l)
within 48 hours; or
KIncrease in SCr to X1.5 times baseline, which
is known or presumed to have occurred within
the prior 7 days; or
KUrine volume o0.5 ml/kg/h for 6 hours.2.1.2: AKI is staged for severity according to the following
criteria (Table 2). ( Not Graded )
2.1.3: The cause of AKI should be determined whenever
possible. ( Not Graded )
RATIONALE
Conditions affecting kidney structure and function can be
considered acute or chronic, depending on their duration.
AKI is one of a number of acute kidney diseases and
disorders (AKD), and can occur with or without other acuteor chronic kidney diseases and disorders (Figure 2). WhereasCKD has a well-established conceptual model and deﬁnitionthat has been useful in clinical medicine, research, and publichealth,
42–44the deﬁnition for AKI is evolving, and the
concept of AKD is relatively new. An operational deﬁnitionof AKD for use in the diagnostic approach to alterations
in kidney function and structure is included in Chapter 2.5,
with further description in Appendix B.
The conceptual model of AKI (Figure 3) is analogous to
the conceptual model of CKD, and is also applicable toAKD.
42,45Circles on the horizontal axis depict stages in the
development (left to right) and recovery (right to left) ofAKI. AKI (in red) is deﬁned as reduction in kidney function,including decreased GFR and kidney failure. The criteria for
the diagnosis of AKI and the stage of severity of AKI are
based on changes in SCr and urine output as depicted in thetriangle above the circles. Kidney failure is a stage of AKIhighlighted here because of its clinical importance. Kidneyfailure is deﬁned as a GFR o15 ml/min per 1.73 m
2bodyhttp://www.kidney-international.org chapter 2.1
&2012 KDIGO
Table 2 | Staging of AKI
Stage Serum creatinine Urine output
1 1.5– 1.9 times baseline
OR
X0.3 mg/dl ( X26.5mmol/l) increaseo0.5 ml/kg/h for
6– 12 hours
2 2.0– 2.9 times baseline o0.5 ml/kg/h for
X12 hours
3 3.0 times baseline
OR
Increase in serum creatinine to
X4.0 mg/dl ( X353.6mmol/l)
OR
Initiation of renal replacement therapyOR, In patients o18 years, decrease in
eGFR to o35 ml/min per 1.73 m
2o0.3 ml/kg/h for
X24 hours
OR
Anuria for X12 hours
Kidney International Supplements (2012) 2, 19–36 19
surface area, or requirement for RRT, although it is
recognized that RRT may be required earlier in the evolutionof AKI. Further description is included in Chapter 2.5 andAppendix A.
It is widely accepted that GFR is the most useful overall
index of kidney function in health and disease, and changesin SCr and urine output are surrogates for changes in GFR. Inclinical practice, an abrupt decline in GFR is assessed from an
increase in SCr or oliguria. Recognizing the limitations of the
use of a decrease in kidney function for the early detectionand accurate estimation of renal injury (see below), there is abroad consensus that, while more sensitive and speciﬁcbiomarkers are needed, changes in SCr and/or urine outputform the basis of all diagnostic criteria for AKI. The ﬁrstinternational interdisciplinary consensus criteria for diag-nosis of AKI were the RIFLE criteria
32proposed by the
ADQI. Modiﬁcations to these criteria have been proposed inorder to better account for pediatric populations (pRIFLE)
32
and for small changes in SCr not captured by RIFLE (AKINcriteria).
23Recommendations 2.1.1 and 2.1.2 represent the
combination of RIFLE and AKIN criteria (Table 3).Existing evidence supports the validity of both RIFLE and
AKIN criteria to identify groups of hospitalized patients withincreased risk of death and/or need for RRT.
2,5,25,28–30
Epidemiological studies, many multicentered, collectivelyenrolling more than 500 000 subjects have been used toestablish RIFLE and/or AKIN criteria as valid methods todiagnose and stage AKI. Recently, Joannidis et al.
29directly
compared RIFLE criteria with and without the AKIN
modiﬁcation. While AKI classiﬁed by either criteria were
associated with a similarly increased hospital mortality, thetwo criteria identiﬁed somewhat different patients. Theoriginal RIFLE criteria failed to detect 9% of cases that weredetected by AKIN criteria. However, the AKIN criteria missed26.9% of cases detected by RIFLE. Examination of the casesmissed by either criteria (Table 4) shows that cases identiﬁedby AKIN but missed by RIFLE were almost exclusively Stage 1
(90.7%), while cases missed by AKIN but identiﬁed by RIFLE
included 30% with RIFLE-I and 18% RIFLE-F; furthermore,these cases had hospital mortality similar to cases identiﬁedby both criteria (37% for I and 41% for F). However, casesmissed by RIFLE but identiﬁed as Stage 1 by AKIN also hadhospital mortality rates nearly twice that of patients who hadno evidence of AKI by either criteria (25% vs. 13%). Thesedata provide strong rationale for use of both RIFLE and
AKIN criteria to identify patients with AKI.
Staging of AKI (Recommendation 2.1.2) is appropriate
because, with increased stage of AKI, the risk for death and
need for RRT increases.
2,5,25,28–31Furthermore, there is now
accumulating evidence of long-term risk of subsequentdevelopment of cardiovascular disease or CKD and mortality,even after apparent resolution of AKI.
47–49
For staging purposes, patients should be staged accord-
ing to the criteria that give them the highest stage. Thuswhen creatinine and urine output map to different stages,AKI AKD CKD
Figure 2 |Overview of AKI, CKD, and AKD. Overlapping ovals
show the relationships among AKI, AKD, and CKD. AKI is a subset
of AKD. Both AKI and AKD without AKI can be superimposed
upon CKD. Individuals without AKI, AKD, or CKD have no knownkidney disease (NKD), not shown here. AKD, acute kidney diseasesand disorders; AKI, acute kidney injury; CKD, chronic kidneydisease.
DeathComplications
NormalIncreased
risk
Antecedents
Intermediate StageAKIOutcomesDamage ↓Stages defined bycreatinine andurine outputare surrogates
Markers suchas NGAL, KIM-1,and IL-18 aresurrogatesGFR
DamageKidney
failureGFR↓
Figure 3 |Conceptual model for AKI. Red circles represent stages of AKI. Yellow circles represent potential antecedents of AKI, and the
pink circle represents an intermediate stage (not yet defined). Thick arrows between circles represent risk factors associated with the
initiation and progression of disease that can be affected or detected by interventions. Purple circles represent outcomes of AKI.‘‘Complications’’ refers to all complications of AKI, including efforts at prevention and treatment, and complications in other organ systems.AKI, acute kidney injury; GFR, glomerular filtration rate. Adapted from Murray PT, Devarajan P, Levey AS, et al. A framework and key research
questions in AKI diagnosis and staging in different environments. Clin J Am Soc Nephrol 2008; 3: 864– 868 with permission from AmericanSociety of Nephrology
45conveyed through Copyright Clearance Center, Inc.; accessed http://cjasn.asnjournals.org/content/3/3/864.full
20 Kidney International Supplements (2012) 2, 19–36chapter 2.1
the patient is staged according to the highest (worst) stage.
The changes in GFR that were published with the originalRIFLE criteria do not correspond precisely to changes in SCr.
As SCr is measured and GFR can only be estimated,
creatinine criteria should be used along with urine outputfor the diagnosis (and staging) of AKI. One additional changein the criteria was made for the sake of clarity and simplicity.For patients reaching Stage 3 by SCr 44.0 mg/dl
(4354mmol/l), rather than require an acute increase of
X0.5 mg/dl ( X44mmol/l) over an unspeciﬁed time period, we
instead require that the patient ﬁrst achieve the creatinine-
based change speciﬁed in the deﬁnition (either X0.3 mg/dl
[X26.5mmol/l] within a 48-hour time window or an increase
ofX1.5 times baseline). This change brings the deﬁnition and
staging criteria to greater parity and simpliﬁes the criteria.
Recommendation 2.1.2 is based on the RIFLE and AKIN
criteria that were developed for average-sized adults. The
creatinine change–based deﬁnitions include an auto-matic Stage 3 classiﬁcation for patients who develop SCr
44.0 mg/dl ( 4354mmol/l) (provided that they ﬁrst satisfythe deﬁnition of AKI in Recommendation 2.1.1). This is
problematic for smaller pediatric patients, including infantsand children with low muscle mass who may not be able to
achieve a SCr of 4.0 mg/dl (354 mmol/l). Thus, the pediatric-
modiﬁed RIFLE AKI criteria
32were developed using a change
in estimated creatinine clearance (eCrCl) based on the
Schwartz formula. In pRIFLE, patients automatically reachStage 3 if they develop an eCrCl o35 ml/min per 1.73 m
2.
However, with this automatic pRIFLE threshold, the SCrchange based AKI deﬁnition (recommendation 2.1.1) isapplicable to pediatric patients, including an increase of
0.3 mg/dl (26.5 mmol/l) SCr.
32
There are important limitations to these recommenda-
tions, including imprecise determination of risk (see Chapter
2.2) and incomplete epidemiology of AKI, especially outsidethe ICU. Clinical judgment is required in order to determineif patients seeming to meet criteria do, in fact, have disease, aswell as to determine if patients are likely to have AKI even ifincomplete clinical data are available to apply the diagnostic
criteria. The application of the diagnostic and staging criteriaTable 3 | Comparison of RIFLE and AKIN criteria for diagnosis and classification of AKI
AKI stagingUrine outputRIFLE
Serum creatinine (common to both) Class Serum creatinine or GFR
Stage 1 Increase of more than or equal to 0.3 mg/dl
(X26.5mmol/l) or increase to more than or equal to
150% to 200% (1.5- to 2-fold) from baselineLess than 0.5 ml/kg/h for
more than 6 hoursRisk Increase in serum creatinine /C21.5 or GFR
decrease 425%
Stage 2 Increased to more than 200% to 300%
(42- to 3-fold) from baselineLess than 0.5 ml/kg per hourfor more than 12 hoursInjury Serum creatinine /C22 or GFR decreased
450%
Stage 3 Increased to more than 300% ( 43-fold)
from baseline, or more than or equal to 4.0 mg/dl(X354mmol/l) with an acute increase of at least
0.5 mg/dl (44 mmol/l) or on RRTLess than 0.3 ml/kg/h for24 hours or anuria for12 hoursFailure Serum creatinine /C23, or serum creatinine
44 mg/dl ( 4354mmol/l) with an acute
rise40.5 mg/dl ( 444mmol/l) or GFR
decreased 475%
Loss Persistent acute renal failure=complete
loss of kidney function 44 weeks
End-stage kidney
diseaseESRD43 months
Note: For conversion of creatinine expressed in SI units to mg/dl, divide by 88.4. For both AKIN stage and RIFLE criteria, only one criterion (creatini ne rise or urine output
decline) needs to be fulfilled. Class is based on the worst of either GFR or urine output criteria. GFR decrease is calculated from the increase in serum creatinine above
baseline. For AKIN, the increase in creatinine must occur in o48 hours. For RIFLE, AKI should be both abrupt (within 1– 7 days) and sustained (more than 24 hours). When
baseline creatinine is elevated, an abrupt rise of at least 0.5 mg/dl (44 mmol/l) to 44 mg/dl ( 4354mmol/l) is sufficient for RIFLE class Failure (modified from Mehta et al.23and
the report of the Acute Dialysis Quality Initiative consortium22).
AKI, acute kidney injury; AKIN, Acute Kidney Injury Network; ESRD, end-stage renal disease; GFR, glomerular filtration rate; RIFLE, risk, injury, f ailure, loss, and end stage; RRT,
renal replacement therapy. Reprinted from Endre ZH. Acute kidney injury: definitions and new paradigms. Adv Chronic Kidney Dis 2008; 15: 213–221 with permission fromNational Kidney Foundation
46; accessed http://www.ackdjournal.org/article/S1548-5595(08)00049-9/fulltext
Table 4 | Cross-tabulation of patients classified by RIFLE vs. AKIN
RIFLE
AKIN Non-AKI Risk Injury Failure Total (AKIN)
Non-AKI n* 8759 (12.9%) 781 (27.7%) 452 (37.4%) 271 (41.3%) 10 263 (15.9%)
Stage1 n* 457 (25.2%) 282 (33.0%) 243 (44.0%) 95 (60.0%) 1077 (34.5%)Stage 2 n* 36 (30.6%) 21 (47.6%) 885 (25.9%) 91 (54.9) 1033 (29.0%)
Stage 3 n* 11 (18.2%) 8 (12.5%) 16 (62.5%) 1948 (41.3) 1983 (41.2%)
Total (RIFLE) n* 9263 (13.6%) 1092 (29.2%) 1596 (32.3%) 2405 (42.6%) 14 356 (21.7%)
*Number of patients classified into the respective stages of AKI by AKIN or RIFLE are cross-tabulated against each other. Hospital mortality of each group is given in
parentheses. Shaded fields denote patients assigned to the same degree of AKI by both classification systems.AKI, acute kidney injury; AKIN, Acute Kidney Injury Network; RIFLE, risk, injury, failure, loss, and end stage. With kind permission from Springer Science+Business Media:
Intensive Care Med. Acute kidney injury in critically ill patients classified by AKIN versus RIFLE using the SAPS 3 database. 35 (2009): 1692– 1702. Jo annidis M, Metnitz B,
Bauer P et al .
29; accessed http://www.springerlink.com/content/r177337030550120/
Kidney International Supplements (2012) 2, 19–36 21chapter 2.1
is discussed in greater detail, along with speciﬁc examples in
Chapter 2.4.
The use of urine output criteria for diagnosis and staging
has been less well validated and in individual patientsthe need for clinical judgment regarding the effects of drugs(e.g., angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors [ACE-I]),ﬂuid balance, and other factors must be included. For veryobese patients, urine output criteria for AKI may includesome patients with normal urine output. However, theserecommendations serve as the starting point for furtherevaluation, possibly involving subspecialists, for a group of
patients recognized to be at increased risk.
Finally, it is axiomatic that patients always be managed
according to the cause of their disease, and thus it is
important to determine the cause of AKI whenever possible.In particular, patients with decreased kidney perfusion, acuteglomerulonephritis, vasculitis, interstitial nephritis, throm-botic microangiopathy, and urinary tract obstruction requireimmediate diagnosis and speciﬁc therapeutic intervention, in
addition to the general recommendations for AKI in the
remainder of this guideline (Table 5).
It is recognized that it is frequently not possible to deter-
mine the cause, and often the exact cause does not dictate aspeciﬁc therapy. However, the syndrome of AKI includessome patients with speciﬁc kidney diseases (e.g., glome-rulonephritis) for which a speciﬁc treatment is available. Assuch, it is always necessary to search for the underlying causeof AKI (see Chapter 2.3).
Research Recommendations
KThe role of biomarkers other than SCr in the earlydiagnosis, differential diagnosis, and prognosis of AKIpatients should be explored. Some important areas inwhich to focus include:
JEarly detection where the gold standard is AKI by
clinical diagnosis after the fact and the biomarker is
compared to existing markers (SCr and urineoutput) at the time of presentation.
JPrognosis where a biomarker is used to predict riskfor AKI or risk for progression of AKI.
JPrognosis where a biomarker is used to predictrecovery after AKI vs. death or need for long-term RRT.
KThe influence of urinary output criteria on AKI staging
needs to be further investigated. Influence of fluid
balance, percent volume overload, diuretic use, anddiffering weights (actual, ideal body weight, lean bodymass) should be considered. Also, it is currently notknown how urine volume criteria should be applied (e.g.,average vs. persistent reduction for the period specified).
KThe influence of SCr or eGFR criteria on AKI stagingneeds to be further investigated. The use of different
relative and absolute SCr increments or eGFR decrements
at different time points and with differently ascertainedbaseline values requires further exploration and valida-tion in various populations.
SUPPLEMENTARY MATERIAL
Appendix A: Background.
Appendix B: Diagnostic Approach to Alterations in Kidney Function
and Structure.
Supplementary material is linked to the online version of the paper at
http://www.kdigo.org/clinical_practice_guidelines/AKI.phpTable 5 | Causes of AKI and diagnostic tests
Selected causes of AKI requiring
immediate diagnosis and specific
therapies Recommended diagnostic tests
Decreased kidney perfusion Volume status and urinary
diagnostic indices
Acute glomerulonephritis, vasculitis,
interstitial nephritis, thromboticmicroangiopathyUrine sediment examination,serologic testing andhematologic testing
Urinary tract obstruction Kidney ultrasound
AKI, acute kidney injury.
22 Kidney International Supplements (2012) 2, 19–36chapter 2.1
Chapter 2.2: Risk assessment
The kidney is a fairly robust organ that can tolerate exposure to
several insults without suffering signiﬁcant structural or
functional change. For this reason, any acute change in kidneyfunction often indicates severe systemic derangement andpredicts a poor prognosis. Risk for AKI is increased by exposureto factors that cause AKI or the presence of factors that increasesusceptibility to AKI. Factors tha t determine susceptibility of the
kidneys to injury include dehydration, certain demographiccharacteristics and genetic predispositions, acute and chronic
comorbidities, and treatments. It is the interaction between
susceptibility and the type and extent of exposure to insults thatdetermines the risk of occurrence of AKI.
Understanding individual ‘‘risk factors’’ may help in
preventing AKI. This is particularly gratifying in the hospitalsetting, where the patient’s susceptibility can be assessedbefore certain exposures as surgery or administration ofpotentially nephrotoxic agents. Accordingly, some suscept-
ibility factors may be modiﬁed, and contemplated exposures
avoided or tailored to reduce the risk of AKI.
Risk assessment in community-acquired AKI is different
from hospital-acquired AKI, for two main reasons: i) Availableevidence on risk factors is largely derived from hospital data andextrapolation to the community setting is questionable. ii) Theopportunity to intervene, prior to exposure, is quite limited.Most patients are seen only after having suffered an exposure
(trauma, infection, poisonous p l a n t ,o ra n i m a l ) .H o w e v e r ,t h e r e
is still room to assess such patients, albeit after exposure, in
order to identify those who are more likely to develop AKI,thereby requiring closer monitoring and general supportivemeasures. It may also be helpful to identify such patients inorder to avoid additional injury. A more complete discussion ofthe approach to identiﬁcation and management of risk for AKIis provided in Appendices C and D.
2.2.1: W e recommend that patients be stratiﬁed for risk of AKI
according to their susceptibilities and exposures. ( 1B)
2.2.2: Manage patients according t o their susceptibilities and
exposures to reduce the risk of AKI (see relevant
guideline sections). ( Not Graded )
2.2.3: Test patients at increased risk for AKI with measure-
ments of SCr and urine output to detect AKI. ( Not
Graded ) Individualize frequency and duration of
monitoring based on patient risk and clinical course.(Not Graded )
RATIONALE
There are many types of exposures that may cause AKI(Table 6) and these are discussed in detail in Appendix C.However, the chances of developing AKI after exposure to thesame insult differ among different individuals. This is
attributed to a number of susceptibility factors which vary
widely from individual to individual. Our understanding ofsusceptibility factors (Table 6) is based on many observa-tional studies that address different settings with regards tothe type, severity, duration, and multiplicity of insults. Whilethis heterogeneity provides insight into some susceptibilityfactors that are common across various populations, thegeneralizability of results from one particular setting to the
next is uncertain.
The course and outcome of AKI are modiﬁed by other
factors, but since these are manifested within the context of
actual disease, they must be categorized as ‘‘prognostic’’rather than ‘‘risk’’ factors, hence being discussed separately inAppendix D. Lastly, the fact that some 30% of patients whorecover from AKI remain at increased risk of CKD,cardiovascular disease, and death calls for the identiﬁcation
of the risk factors that can identify such patients in the hopes
of providing them with timely preventive measures.
50–52
Finally, it is important to screen patients who have
undergone an exposure (e.g., sepsis, trauma) and to continuemonitor high-risk patients until the risk has subsided. Exactintervals for checking SCr and in which individuals tomonitor urine output remain matters of clinical judgment;however, as a general rule, high risk in-patients should have
SCr measured at least daily and more frequently after an
exposure, and critically ill patients should have urine outputmonitoring. This will necessitate urinary bladder catheteriza-tion in many cases, and the risks of infection should also beconsidered in the monitoring plan.
A recent clinical practice assessment in the UK concluded
that only 50% of patients with AKI were considered to havereceived a ‘‘good’’ overall standard of care. This ﬁgure fell tohttp://www.kidney-international.org chapter 2.2
&2012 KDIGO
Table 6 | Causes of AKI: exposures and susceptibilities for
non-specific AKI
Exposures Susceptibilities
Sepsis Dehydration or volume depletion
Critical illness Advanced age
Circulatory shock Female gender
Burns Black race
Trauma CKD
Cardiac surgery (especially
with CPB)Chronic diseases (heart, lung, liver)
Major noncardiac surgery Diabetes mellitus
Nephrotoxic drugs Cancer
Radiocontrast agents Anemia
Poisonous plants and animals
CKD, chronic kidney disease; CPB, cardiopulmonary bypass.
Kidney International Supplements (2012) 2, 19–36 23
just over 30% if AKI developed during a hospital admission
rather than being diagnosed before admission.53The authors
also felt that there was an unacceptable delay in recognizingAKI in 43% of those that developed the condition afteradmission, and that in a ﬁfth of such patients its develop-ment was predictable and avoidable. Their recommendationswere simple: risk assessment for AKI as part of the initialevaluation of emergency admissions, along with appropriate
serum biochemistry on admission and at frequent intervals
thereafter.
53
RESEARCH RECOMMENDATIONS
KBetter delineation of risk for hospital- and community-acquired AKI is needed.
KBetter delineation of the effects of age on the risk for AKIis needed.KStudies are needed to develop and validate scoring systemsfor AKI risk prediction in various settings, in addition tocardiac surgery and exposure to radiocontrast material.
KGenome-wide association studies are needed to deter-mine risk of AKI in different hospital settings and withrespect to long-term outcomes.
KStudies are needed on risk factors for the development of,recovery from, and long-term outcomes of community-
acquired AKI, including sepsis, trauma, tropical infec-
tions, snake bites, and ingestion of toxic plants, etc.
SUPPLEMENTARY MATERIAL
Appendix C: Risk Determination.
Appendix D: Evaluation and General Management Guidelines for
Patients with AKI.
Supplementary material is linked to the online version of the paper at
http://www.kdigo.org/clinical_practice_guidelines/AKI.php
24 Kidney International Supplements (2012) 2, 19–36chapter 2.2
Chapter 2.3: Evaluation and general management of
patients with and at risk for AKI
Given that AKI is associated with signiﬁcant morbidity and
mortality, and because no speciﬁc treatment is available toreverse AKI, early recognition and management is para-mount. Indeed, recognition of patients at risk for AKI, orwith possible AKI but prior to clinical manifestations, islikely to result in better outcomes than treating onlyestablished AKI. Chapter 2.2 introduced the approach to
risk assessment with further detail provided in Appendix C.
This chapter will concern itself with the evaluationand general management of patients with, or even at riskfor, AKI. Further detail is provided in Appendix D. Wehighlight the importance of beginning management at theearliest point in the development of AKI—in patients withsuspected AKI or even in those at increased risk who havebeen exposed to the various factors discussed in Chapters 2.2
and Appendix C.
Although much of the remaining chapters in this guide-
line pertain to management of speciﬁc aspects of AKI, there
are general management principles that are common to allpatients and these will be discussed here and furtherexpounded upon in Appendix D. Treatment goals in patientswith AKI include both reducing kidney injury and complica-tions related to decreased kidney function.
2.3.1: Evaluate patients with AKI promptly to determine
the cause, with special attention to reversible
causes. ( Not Graded )
2.3.2: Monitor patients with AKI with measurements of
SCr and urine output to stage the severity,according to Recommendation 2.1.2. ( Not Graded )
2.3.3: Manage patients with AKI according to the stage
(see Figure 4) and cause. ( Not Graded )
2.3.4: Evaluate patients 3 months after AKI for resolu-
tion, new onset, or worsening of pre-existing CKD.(Not Graded )
KIf patients have CKD, manage these patients asdetailed in the KDOQI CKD Guideline (Guide-lines 7–15). ( Not Graded )
KIf patients do not have CKD, consider them to beat increased risk for CKD and care for them as
detailed in the KDOQI CKD Guideline 3 for
patients at increased risk for CKD. ( Not Graded )http://www.kidney-international.org chapter 2.3
&2012 KDIGO
Figure 4 |Stage-based management of AKI. Shading of boxes indicates priority of action—solid shading indicates actions that are
equally appropriate at all stages whereas graded shading indicates increasing priority as intensity increases. AKI, acute kidney injury;
ICU, intensive-care unit.
Kidney International Supplements (2012) 2, 19–36 25
RATIONALE
As emphasized in Chapter 2.2, AKI is not a disease but
rather a clinical syndrome with multiple etiologies. While
much of the literature examining epidemiology and clinical
consequences of AKI appear to treat this syndrome as ahomogeneous disorder, the reality is that AKI is hetero-geneous and often is the result of multiple insults. Figure 5illustrates an approach to evaluation of AKI. Furtherdiscussion of evaluation in clinical practice is provided inAppendix D.The clinical evaluation of AKI includes a careful history
and physical examination. Drug history should include over-the-counter formulations and herbal remedies or recreationaldrugs. The social history should include exposure to tropicaldiseases (e.g., malaria), waterways or sewage systems, andexposure to rodents (e.g., leptospirosis, hantavirus). Physicalexamination should include evaluation of ﬂuid status, signsfor acute and chronic heart failure, infection, and sepsis.
Measurement of cardiac output, preload, preload respon-
siveness, and intra-abdominal pressure should be considered
Figure 5 |Evaluation of AKI according to the stage and cause.
26 Kidney International Supplements (2012) 2, 19–36chapter 2.3
in the appropriate clinical context. Laboratory parameters—
including SCr, blood urea nitrogen (BUN), and electrolytes,complete blood count and differential—should be obtained.Urine analysis and microscopic examination as well asurinary chemistries may be helpful in determining theunderlying cause of AKI. Imaging tests, especially ultrasound,are important components of the evaluation for patients withAKI. Finally, a number of biomarkers of functional change
and cellular damage are under evaluation for early diagnosis,
risk assessment for, and prognosis of AKI (see Appendix Dfor detailed discussion).
Individualize frequency and duration of monitoring based
on patient risk, exposure and clinical course. Stage is a predictorof the risk for mortality and decreased kidney function (seeChapter 2.4). Dependent on the stage, the intensity of futurepreventive measures and therapy should be performed.
Because the stage of AKI has clearly been shown to
correlate with short-term
2,5,27,29and even longer-term out-
comes,31it is advisable to tailor management to AKI stage.
Figure 4 lists a set of actions that should be considered forpatients with AKI. Note that for patients at increased risk (seeChapters 2.2 and 2.4), these actions actually begin evenbefore AKI is diagnosed.
Note that management and diagnostic steps are both
included in Figure 4. This is because response to therapy is animportant part of the diagnostic approach. There are fewspeciﬁc tests to establish the etiology of AKI. However, apatient’s response to treatment (e.g., discontinuation of apossible nephrotoxic agent) provides important informationas to the diagnosis.
Nephrotoxic drugs account for some part of AKI in 20– 30%
of patients. Often, agents like antimicrobials (e.g., aminoglyco-
sides, amphotericin) and radiocontrast are used in patients that
are already at high risk for AKI (e.g., critically ill patients withsepsis). Thus, it is often difﬁcult to discern exactly whatcontribution these agents have on the overall course of AKI.Nevertheless, it seems prudent to limit exposure to these agentswhenever possible and to weigh the risk of developing orworsening AKI against the risk associated with not using theagent. For example, when alternative therapies or diagnostic
approaches are available they should be considered.
In order to ensure adequate circulating blood volume, it is
sometimes necessary to obtain hemodynamic variables. Staticvariables like central venous pressure are not nearly as useful
as dynamic variables, such as pulse-pressure variation,inferior vena cava ﬁlling by ultrasound and echocardio-graphic appearance of the heart (see also Appendix D).
Note that while the actions listed in Figure 4 provide
an overall starting point for stage-based evaluation andmanagement, they are neither complete not mandatory foran individual patient. For example, the measurement of urine
output does not imply that the urinary bladder catheteriza-
tion is mandatory for all patients, and clinicians shouldbalance the risks of any procedures with the beneﬁts.Furthermore, clinicians must individualize care decisionsbased on the totality of the clinical situation. However, it isadvisable to include AKI stage in these decisions.
The evaluation and management of patients with AKI
requires attention to cause and stage of AKI, as well as factors
that relate to further injury to the kidney, or complications
from decreased kidney function. Since AKI is a risk factor forCKD, it is important to evaluate patients with AKI for newonset or worsening of pre-existing CKD. If patients haveCKD, manage patients as detailed in the KDOQI CKDGuideline (Guidelines 7–15). If patients do not have CKD,consider them to be at increased risk for CKD and care forthem as detailed in the KDOQI CKD Guideline 3 for patients
at increased risk for CKD.
RESEARCH RECOMMENDATIONS
KClinical research aimed at testing early management
strategies is urgently needed. Such trials should alsoaddress the risks and benefits of commonly used fluid-management strategies, including intravenous (i.v.) fluidsand diuretics.
KMethods to better assess fluid status in critically ill andother hospitalized patients at risk for AKI are needed.
KResearch is needed, with follow-up beyond hospital stay,
to better understand the clinical consequences of AKI in
patients with and without underlying CKD.
SUPPLEMENTARY MATERIAL
Appendix C: Risk Determination.
Appendix D: Evaluation and General Management Guidelines for
Patients with AKI.
Supplementary material is linked to the online version of the paper at
http://www.kdigo.org/clinical_practice_guidelines/AKI.php
Kidney International Supplements (2012) 2, 19–36 27chapter 2.3
Chapter 2.4: Clinical applications
This chapter provides a detailed application of the AKI
deﬁnition and staging for clinical diagnosis and management.The deﬁnitions and classiﬁcation system discussed inChapter 2.1 can be used easily in many patients and requireslittle clinical interpretation. However, in real time, clinicians
do not always have a complete dataset to work with
and individual patients present with unique histories. Asdiscussed in the previous chapter, it is difﬁcult to distinguishAKI from CKD in many cases. In addition, as many astwo-thirds of all cases of AKI begin prior to hospitali-zation (community-acquired AKI). Therefore, cliniciansmay be faced with patients in whom kidney functionis already decreased and, during the hospitalization,
improves rather than worsens. Finally, many patients
do not have a prior measurement of kidney functionavailable for comparison. This chapter provides detailedexamples of the application of these deﬁnitions to the clinicalsetting.
Examples of application of AKI definitions
Table 7 illustrates a number of examples whereby patients
presenting with possible AKI can be diagnosed. Cases A-F
have a measurement of baseline SCr. To simplify decision-making, baseline estimated glomerular ﬁltration rate (eGFR)exceeds 60 ml/min per 1.73 m
2in these patients, so none has
pre-existing CKD. Cases A-F can all be diagnosed with AKIby applying the ﬁrst two criteria in Recommendation 2.1.1. (adocumented increase of at least 0.3 mg/dl ( 426.5mmol/l)
[within 48 hours or a 50% increase from presumed baseline).
Note that a patient can be diagnosed with AKI by fulﬁlling
either criterion 1 or 2 (or 3, urine output) and thus casesB,C,D, and F all fulﬁll the deﬁnition of AKI. Note also thatpatients may be diagnosed earlier using criterion 1 or 2. Earlydiagnosis may improve outcome so it is advantageous todiagnose patients as rapidly as possible. For example, case Acan be diagnosed with AKI on day 2 by the ﬁrst criterion,whereas the second criterion is not satisﬁed until day 3(increase from 1.3 to 1.9). However, this is only true becausethe episode of AKI began prior to medical attention, and thus
the day 1 SCr level was already increased. If creatinine
measurements had available with 48 hours prior to day 1 andif this level had been at baseline (1.0 mg/dl [88.4 mmol/l]), it
would have been possible to diagnose AKI on day 1 using thesecond criterion.
Cases F-H do not have a baseline measurement of SCr
available. Elevated SCr (reduced eGFR) on day 1 of thehospitalization is consistent with either CKD or AKD
without AKI. In Case F, baseline SCr can be inferred
to be below the day 1 value because of the subsequentclinical course; thus, we can infer the patient has had anepisode of AKI. In case G, AKI can be diagnosed byapplication of criterion 2, but the patient may have under-lying CKD. Case H does not fulﬁll the deﬁnition forAKI based on either criteria, and has either CKD or AKDwithout AKI.
The example of Case A raises several important issues.
First, frequent monitoring of SCr in patients at increased riskof AKI will signiﬁcantly improve diagnostic time andaccuracy. If Case A had not presented to medical attention(or if SCr had not been checked) until day 7, the case of AKIwould likely have been missed. Frequent measurement of SCrin high-risk patients, or in patients in which AKI is suspected,is therefore encouraged—see Chapter 2.3. The second issue
highlighted by Case A is the importance of baseline SCr
measurements. Had no baseline been available it would stillhave been possible to diagnose AKI on day 3 (by either usingcriterion 2 or by using criterion 1 and accepting the baselineSCr as 1.3); however, not only would this have resulted in ahttp://www.kidney-international.org chapter 2.4
&2012 KDIGO
Table 7 | AKI diagnosis
Serum creatinine mg/dl ( lmol/l) Diagnosis AKI?
Criterion 1 Criterion 2
Case Baseline Day 1 Day 2 Day 3 Day 7 50% from baseline X0.3 mg/dl ( X26.5lmol/l) rise in p48 hours
A 1.0 (88) 1.3 (115) 1.5 (133) 2.0 (177) 1.0 (88) Yes Yes
B 1.0 (88) 1.1 (97) 1.2 (106) 1.4 (124) 1.0 (88) No YesC 0.4 (35) 0.5 (44) 0.6 (53) 0.7 (62) 0.4 (35) Yes NoD 1.0 (88) 1.1 (97) 1.2 (106) 1.3 (115) 1.5 (133) Yes NoE 1.0 (88) 1.3 (115) 1.5 (133) 1.8 (159) 2.2 (195) Yes YesF ? 3.0 (265) 2.6 (230) 2.2 (195) 1.0 (88) Yes NoG ? 1.8 (159) 2.0 (177) 2.2 (195) 1.6 (141) ? YesH ? 3.0 (265) 3.1 (274) 3.0 (265) 2.9 (256) ? No
28
Kidney International Supplements (2012) 2, 19–36
delay in diagnosis, it would have resulted in a delay in staging
(see Table 7). On day 7, it can be inferred that the patient’sbaseline was no higher than 1.0 mg/dl (88 mmol/l) and thus
correct staging of Case A as Stage 2 (two-fold increase from
the reference SCr, see below and Table 7) on day 3 could have
been determined in retrospect. However, if a baseline SCr wasavailable to use as the reference, the correct stage could bedetermined on day 3.
Case B illustrates why criterion 2 can detect cases of AKI
missed by criterion 1. It also clariﬁes why these cases areunusual. Had the SCr increased to 1.5 mg/dl (132.6 mmol/l)
as opposed to peaking at 1.4 mg/dl (123.8 mmol/l), it would
have been picked up by criterion 1 as well. By contrastCases C, D, and even F illustrate how criterion 2 maymiss cases identiﬁed by criterion 1. Note that Case F canonly be diagnosed by inference. By day 7, it can beinferred that the baseline was no higher than 1.0 mg/dl(88mmol/l) and thus it can be determined that the patient
presented with AKI. However, if the baseline SCr couldbe estimated it would be possible to make this inference as
early as day 1.Estimating baseline SCr
Many patients will present with AKI without a reliable
baseline SCr on record. Baseline SCr can be estimated usingthe Modiﬁcation of Diet in Renal Disease (MDRD) Studyequation assuming that baseline eGFR is 75 ml/min per 1.73
m
2(Table 9).22This approach has been used in many, but not
all, studies of AKI epidemiology using RIFLE2,5,25,30–32,54–63
(see Table 8) and has recently been validated.64Hence, most
current data concerning AKI deﬁned by RIFLE criteria are
based on estimated baseline SCr for a large proportion ofpatients.
Table 9 shows the range of estimated SCr obtained by
back-calculation for various age, sex, and race categories.
When the baseline SCr is unknown, an estimated SCr can be
used provided there is no evidence of CKD (see Appendix B).Fortunately, when there is a history of CKD, a baseline SCr isusually available. Unfortunately, many cases of CKD are notidentiﬁed, and thus estimating the baseline SCr may risklabeling a patient with AKI when in reality the diagnosis wasunidentiﬁed CKD. As discussed further in Appendix B, it isessential to evaluate a patient with presumed AKI forTable 8 | Overview of the approaches to determine baseline SCr in the application of RIFLE classification in previous studies
StudyNo. of pts
analyzedMulti-/
single-centerCriteriaused Method to determine baseline SCr%
recorded%
estimated
Bagshaw
25120123 multi cr+uo estimated by MDRD formula 0 100
Ostermann3041972 multi cr estimated by MDRD formula 0 100
Uchino520126 single cr retrieved from hospital database, or estimated by MDRD formula N/A N/A
Bell548152 single cr+uo retrieved from hospital database, or estimated by MDRD formula N/A N/A
Hoste25383 single cr+uo estimated by MDRD formula, or admission creatinine value,
whatever was lowerN/A N/A
Ali315321 multi cr retrieved from hospital database, or admission creatinine value 100 0
Cruz552164 multi cr+uo retrieved from hospital database, or estimated by MDRD formula 78 22
Perez-Valdivieso561008 single cr estimated by MDRD formula 0 100
Kuitunen57813 single cr+uo preoperative value 100 0
Coca58304 single cr the lowest s-creatinine value in the first 5 hospital days 100 0
Arnaoutakis59267 single N/A N/A N/A N/A
Abosaif60247 single cr+uo retrieved from hospital database, or admission creatinine value 100 0
Maccariello61214 multi cr+uo retrieved from hospital database, or estimated by MDRD formula N/A N/A
Jenq62134 single cr+uo admission creatinine value, or estimated by MDRD formula 90 10
cr, creatinine criteria; MDRD, Modification of Diet in Renal Disease; N/A, not available; pts, patients; SCr, serum creatinine; uo, urine output criteria.
Reprinted from Zavada J, Hoste E, Cartin-Ceba R et al. A comparison of three methods to estimate baseline creatinine for RIFLE classification. Nephrol Dial Transplant 2010;
25(12): 3911–3918 (Ref. 64) by permission from The European Renal Association-European Dialysis and Transplant Association; accessed http://ndt.oxfordjournals.org/content/
25/12/3911.long
Table 9 | Estimated baseline SCr
Age (years) Black males mg/dl ( lmol/l) Other males mg/dl ( lmol/l) Black females mg/dl ( lmol/l) Other females mg/dl ( lmol/l)
20– 24 1.5 (133) 1.3 (115) 1.2 (106) 1.0 (88)
25– 29 1.5 (133) 1.2 (106) 1.1 (97) 1.0 (88)
30– 39 1.4 (124) 1.2 (106) 1.1 (97) 0.9 (80)40– 54 1.3 (115) 1.1 (97) 1.0 (88) 0.9 (80)55– 65 1.3 (115) 1.1 (97) 1.0 (88) 0.8 (71)465 1.2 (106) 1.0 (88) 0.9 (80) 0.8 (71)
Estimated glomerular filtration rate=75 (ml/min per 1.73 m2)=186/C2(serum creatinine [S Cr])/C01.154/C2(age)/C00.203/C2(0.742 if female) /C2(1.210 if black)=exp(5.228 /C01.154/C2
In [S Cr])/C00.203/C2In(age) /C0(0.299 if female) + (0.192 if black).
Reprinted from Bellomo R, Ronco C, Kellum JA et al. Acute renal failure - definition, outcome measures, animal models, fluid therapy and information technology needs: the
Second International Consensus Conference of the Acute Dialysis Quality Initiative (ADQI) Group. Crit Care 2004; 8: R204-212 with permission from B ellomo R et al.22; accessed
http://ccforum.com/content/8/4/R204
Kidney International Supplements (2012) 2, 19–36 29chapter 2.4
presence of CKD. Furthermore, CKD and AKI may coexist.
By using all available clinical data (laboratory, imaging,
history, and physical exam) it should be possible to arrive at
both an accurate diagnosis as well as an accurate estimate ofbaseline SCr. Importantly, excluding some cases of hemo-dilution secondary to massive ﬂuid resuscitation (discussedbelow), the lowest SCr obtained during a hospitalizationis usually equal to or greater than the baseline. This SCrshould be used to diagnose (and stage) AKI. For example, ifno baseline SCr was available in Case A, diagnosis of AKI
could be made using the MDRD estimated SCr (Table 9). If
Case A were a 70-year-old white female with no evidence orhistory of CKD, the baseline SCr would be 0.8 mg/dl(71mmol/l) and a diagnosis of AKI would be possible
even on day 1 (criterion 1, X50% increase from baseline).
However, if the patient was a 20-year-old black male, hisbaseline SCr would be estimated at 1.5 mg/dl (133 mmol/l).
Since his admission SCr is lower, this is assumed to be the
baseline SCr until day 7 when he returns to his true baseline,
and this value can be taken as the baseline. These dynamicchanges in interpretation are not seen in epidemiologicstudies, which are conducted when all the data are present,but are common in clinical medicine. Note that the onlyway to diagnose AKI (by SCr criteria) in Case H is to use anestimated SCr.
Examples of application of AKI stages
Once a diagnosis of AKI has been made, the next step is tostage it (Recommendation 2.1.2). Like diagnosis, staging
requires reference to a baseline SCr when SCr criteria are
used. This baseline becomes the reference SCr for stagingpurposes. Table 10 shows the maximum stage for eachCase described in Table 7. Staging for Case A was alreadymentioned. The maximum stage is 2 because reference SCr is1.0 mg/dl (88 mmol/l) and the maximum SCr is 2.0 mg/dl
(177mmol/l). Had the reference SCr been 0.6 mg/dl (53 mmol/
l), the maximum stage would have been 3. Case F was staged
by using the lowest SCr (1.0 mg/dl [88 mmol/l]) as the
reference. Of course, the actual baseline for this case might
have been lower but this would not affect the stage, since it isalready Stage 3. Note that if this patient was a 35-year-oldwhite male, his MDRD estimated baseline SCr would be1.2 mg/dl (106 mmol/l) (Table 9) and his initial stage on
admission (day 1) would be assumed to be 2. However, once
his SCr recovered to 1.0 mg/dl (88 mmol/l) on day 7, it would
be possible to restage him as having had Stage 3. Once he has
recovered, there may be no difference between Stage 2 or 3 interms of his care plan. On the other hand, accurately stagingthe severity of AKI may be important for intensity of follow-up and future risk.
Note that Cases G and H can only be staged if the
reference SCr can be inferred. Case G may be as mild as stage
1 if the baseline is equal to the nadir SCr on day 7. On the
other hand, if this case were a 70-year-old white female withno known evidence or history of CKD, the reference SCrwould be 0.8 mg/dl (71 mmol/l) based on an estimated
baseline (Table 9). In this case, the severity on day 1 wouldalready be stage 2.
Urine output vs. SCr
Both urine output and SCr are used as measures of an acutechange in GFR. The theoretical advantage of urine outputover SCr is the speed of the response. For example, if GFRwere to suddenly fall to zero, a rise in SCr would not bedetectable for several hours. On the other hand, urine outputwould be affected immediately. Less is known about the useof urine output for diagnosis and staging compared to SCr,since administrative databases usually do not capture urine
output (and frequently it is not even measured, especially
outside the ICU). However, studies using both SCr and urineoutput to diagnose AKI show increased incidence, suggestingthat the use of SCr alone may miss many patients. The useof urine output criteria (criterion 3) will also reduce thenumber of cases where criterion 1 and criterion 2 arediscordant (cases B,C,D, and F in Table 7), as many of thesecases will be picked up by urine output criteria.
Timeframe for diagnosis and staging
The purpose of setting a timeframe for diagnosis of AKI is to
clarify the meaning of the word ‘‘acute’’ . A disease process
that results in a change in SCr over many weeks is not AKI(though it may still be an important clinical entity: seeAppendix B). For the purpose of this guideline, AKI isdeﬁned in terms of a process that results in a 50% increase inTable 10 | AKI staging
Serum creatinine mg/dl ( lmol/l)
Case Baseline Day 1 Day 2 Day 3 Day 7 Reference creatinine Max AKI stage
A 1.0 (88) 1.3 (115) 1.5 (133) 2.0 (177) 1.0 (88) 1.0 (88) 2
B 1.0 (88) 1.1 (97) 1.2 (106) 1.4 (124) 1.0 (88) 1.0 (88) 1
C 0.4 (35) 0.5 (44) 0.6 (53) 0.7 (62) 0.4 (35) 0.4 (35) 1
D 1.0 (88) 1.1 (97) 1.2 (106) 1.3 (115) 1.5 (133) 1.0 (88) 1
E 1.0 (88) 1.3 (115) 1.5 (133) 1.8 (159) 2.2 (195) 1.0 (88) 2
F ? 3.0 (265) 2.6 (230) 2.2 (195) 1.0 (88) 1.0 (88) 3
G ? 1.8 (159) 2.0 (177) 2.2 (195) 1.6 (141) ? X1
H ? 3.0 (265) 3.1 (274) 3.0 (265) 2.9 (256) ? ?
AKI, acute kidney injury.
30 Kidney International Supplements (2012) 2, 19–36chapter 2.4
SCr within 1 week or a 0.3 mg/dl (26.5 mmol/l) increase
within 48 hours (Recommendation 2.1.1). Importantly, there
is no stipulation as to when the 1-week or 48-hour timeperiods can occur. It is stated unequivocally that it does notneed to be the ﬁrst week or 48 hours of a hospital or ICU stay.Neither does the time window refer to duration of theinciting event. For example, a patient may have a 2-weekcourse of sepsis but only develop AKI in the second week.
Importantly, the 1-week or 48-hour timeframe is for
diagnosis of AKI, not staging. A patient can be staged overthe entire episode of AKI such that, if a patient develops a50% increase in SCr in 5 days but ultimately has a three-foldincrease over 3 weeks, he or she would be diagnosed with AKIand ultimately staged as Stage 3.
As with any clinical criteria, the timeframe for AKI is
somewhat arbitrary. For example, a disease process that
results in a 50% increase in SCr over 2 weeks would not fulﬁll
diagnostic criteria for AKI even if it ultimately resulted incomplete loss of kidney function. Similarly, a slow processthat resulted in a steady rise in SCr over 2 weeks, and then asudden increase of 0.3 mg/dl (26.5 mmol/l) in a 48-hour
period, would be classiﬁed as AKI. Such are the inevitablevagaries of any disease classiﬁcation. However, one scenariodeserves speciﬁc mention, and that is the case of the patient
with an increased SCr at presentation. As already discussed,
the diagnosis of AKI requires a second SCr value forcomparison. This SCr could be a second measured SCrobtained within 48 hours, and if it is X0.3 mg/dl
(X26.5mmol/l) greater than the ﬁrst SCr, AKI can be
diagnosed. Alternatively, the second SCr can be a baselinevalue that was obtained previously or estimated from theMDRD equation (see Table 9). However, this poses two
dilemmas. First, how far back can a baseline value be
retrieved and still expected to be ‘‘valid’’; second, how canwe infer acuity when we are seeing the patient for the ﬁrsttime?
Both of these problems will require an integrated
approach as well as clinical judgment. In general, it isreasonable in patients without CKD to assume that SCrwill be stable over several months or even years, so that
a SCr obtained 6 months or even 1 year previously would
reasonable reﬂect the patient’s premorbid baseline. However,in a patient with CKD and a slow increasing SCr over severalmonths, it may be necessary to extrapolate the baseline SCrbased on prior data. In terms of inferring acuity it is mostreasonable to determine the course of the disease processthought to be causing the episode of AKI. For example, for apatient with a 5-day history of fever and cough, and chest
radiograph showing an inﬁltrate, it would be reasonable to
infer that the clinical condition is acute. If SCr is found to beX50% increased from baseline, this ﬁts the deﬁnition of AKI.Conversely, a patient presenting with an increased SCr in theabsence of any acute disease or nephrotoxic exposure willrequire evidence of an acute process before a diagnosis can bemade. Evidence that the SCr is changing is helpful inestablishing acuity.Clinical judgment
While the deﬁnitions and classiﬁcation system discussed inChapter 2.1 provide a framework for the clinical diagnosis ofAKI, they should not be interpreted to replace or to excludeclinical judgment. While the vast majority of cases willﬁt both AKI diagnostic criteria as well as clinical judgment,AKI is still a clinical diagnosis—not all cases of AKI will ﬁtwithin the proposed deﬁnition and not all cases ﬁtting the
deﬁnition should be diagnosed as AKI. However, exceptions
should be very rare.
Pseudo-AKI. As with other clinical diagnoses deﬁned by
laboratory results (e.g., hyponatremia), the clinician must becautious to interpret laboratory data in the clinical context.The most obvious example is with laboratory errors or errorsin reporting. Erroneous laboratory values should obviouslynot be used to diagnose disease and suspicious lab results
should always be repeated. Another example is when two SCr
measurements are obtained by different laboratories. Whilethe coefﬁcient of variation for SCr is very small ( o5%) by
various clinical testing methods, variation (bias) from onelaboratory to the next may be considerably higher, althoughit is unlikely to approach 50%. Given that the SCr deﬁnitionof AKI always uses at least two values, the variation and biasbetween each measure is further magniﬁed—the coefﬁcient
of variation for comparison of two lab tests is equal to the
square root of the sum of each coefﬁcient squared. Althoughthe international standardization of SCr measurements willlargely eliminate interlaboratory bias in the future, care isneeded in interpreting lab values obtained from differentlabs. Furthermore, daily variation in SCr due to differences indiet and activity may be as great as 10%. Finally, endogenouschromogens (e.g., bilirubin, ascorbic acid, uric acid) and
exogenous chromogens and drugs (e.g., cephalosporins,
trimethoprim, cimetidine) may interfere with the creatinineassay. The cumulative effect of these various factorsinﬂuencing precision, bias, and biological variation mayapproach the level at which it could impact the diagnosis ofAKI. A similar problem exists with urine output. Particularlyoutside the ICU, urine output is not often reported and urinecollections may be inaccurate, especially in noncatheterized
patients. Finally, as discussed in Chapter 2.1, a weight-based
criterion for urine output will mean that some very obesepatients will fulﬁll the deﬁnition of AKI without any kidneyabnormality. Clinical judgment should always be exercised ininterpreting such data.
Atypical AKI. A complementary problem to pseudo-AKI is
the situation where a case of AKI fails to meet the deﬁnition.These cases should be distinguished from conditions in which
data are simply missing (discussed above) and refer to
situations in which existing data are unreliable. For example,a patient might receive very large quantities of intravascularﬂuids such that SCr is falsely lowered.
65Similarly, massive
blood transfusions will result in the SCr more closelyreﬂecting the kidney function of the blood donors than thepatient. It is unusual for these cases not to result in oliguriaand, thus, most patients will be diagnosed with AKI even if
Kidney International Supplements (2012) 2, 19–36 31chapter 2.4
SCr is not increased. Nevertheless, the clinician should
be cognizant of possibility that SCr may be falsely loweredby large-volume ﬂuid resuscitation or transfusion; thus, anormal value may not rule out AKI. Changes in creatinineproduction are also well known in conditions such as musclebreakdown where production increases and in musclewasting (including advanced liver disease) where productionis decreased. Creatinine production may also be decreased insepsis
66possibly due to decreased muscle perfusion.
SUPPLEMENTARY MATERIAL
Appendix B: Diagnostic Approach to Alterations in Kidney Function
and Structure.
Supplementary material is linked to the online version of the paper at
http://www.kdigo.org/clinical_practice_guidelines/AKI.php
32 Kidney International Supplements (2012) 2, 19–36chapter 2.4
Chapter 2.5: Diagnostic approach to alterations in
kidney function and structure
Definitions of AKI, CKD and AKD
AKI and CKD were deﬁned by separate Work Groups
according to different criteria. The deﬁnition for each isbased on alterations in kidney function or structure. AKI andCKD have many causes which may lead to alterations ofkidney function and structure that do not meet the criteriafor the deﬁnition of either AKI or CKD, yet patients with
these diseases and disorders may need medical attention to
restore kidney function and reverse damage to kidneystructure to avoid adverse outcomes. A uniform andsystematic nomenclature could enhance understanding andcommunication about these diseases and disorders, and leadto improved medical care, research, and public health. Forthese reasons, the Work Group proposed an operationaldeﬁnition for AKD to provide an integrated clinical approach
to patients with abnormalities of kidney function and
structure.
Table 11 compares the deﬁnitions for AKI, CKD, and
AKD. We have also included an operational deﬁnition of ‘‘noknown kidney disease’’ (NKD) for those who do not meetthese criteria, with the understanding that clinical judgmentis required to determine the extent of the evaluation that isnecessary to assess kidney function and structure. In the
following sections, we will elaborate on each component of
these deﬁnitions.GFR and SCr
CKD, AKD, and AKI are deﬁned by parameters expressingthe level of kidney function. Table 12 gives examples of eachcondition based on GFR and different magnitudes of increasein SCr.
To illustrate the relationship of changes in SCr to changes
in eGFR, we simulated changes in eGFR that would result
from changes in SCr corresponding to the KDIGO deﬁnition
of AKI in the Chronic Kidney Disease EpidemiologyCollaboration cohort.
67,68Figure 6 shows the relationship
of these changes in eGFR to the deﬁnition and stages of AKI.Not all patients with AKI would meet the eGFR criteria forthe deﬁnition of AKD.
GFR/SCr algorithm
Figure 7 provides a diagnostic algorithm based on asequential approach through three questions: i) Is GFRdecreased or is SCr increased (according to the criteria in
Table 12)?; ii) Is SCr increasing or GFR decreasing (according
to the criteria in Table 12)?; and iii) Does the decrease in GFRor increase in SCr resolve within 3 months? Based on a ‘‘yes’’or ‘‘no’’ response to these three sequential questions, allcombinations of AKI, AKD, and CKD can be identiﬁed. Inthis section, we review the algorithm and illustrate its usefor classiﬁcation of patients with acute and chronic kidneydisease in two previously reported cohorts.http://www.kidney-international.org chapter 2.5
&2012 KDIGO
Table 11 | Definitions of AKI, CKD, and AKD
Functional criteria Structural criteria
AKI Increase in SCr by 50% within 7 days, OR
Increase in SCr by 0.3 mg/dl (26.5 mmol/l)
within 2 days, OR
OliguriaNo criteria
CKD GFR o60 ml/min per 1.73 m2for
43 monthsKidney damage
for43 months
AKD AKI, OR
GFRo60 ml/min per 1.73 m2for
o3 months, OR
Decrease in GFR by X35% or increase
in SCr by 450% foro3 monthsKidney damageforo3 months
NKD GFR X60 ml/min per 1.73 m
2
Stable SCrNo damage
GFR assessed from measured or estimated GFR. Estimated GFR does not reflect
measured GFR in AKI as accurately as in CKD. Kidney damage assessed by pathology,
urine or blood markers, imaging, and—for CKD—presence of a kidney transplant. NKDindicates no functional or structural criteria according to the definitions for AKI, AKD,
or CKD. Clinical judgment is required for individual patient decision-making regarding
the extent of evaluation that is necessary to assess kidney function and structure.AKD, acute kidney diseases and disorders; AKI, acute kidney injury; CKD, chronic
kidney disease; GFR, glomerular filtration rate; NKD, no known kidney disease;
SCr, serum creatinine.Table 12 | Examples of AKI, CKD, and AKD based on GFR and
increases in SCr
Baseline GFR
(ml/min per1.73 m
2)Increase in
SCr during
7 consecutive daysGFR during
next
3 months Diagnosis
460 41.5/C2 NA AKI
460 o1.5/C2 o60 AKD without AKI
460 o1.5/C2 460 NKD
Baseline GFR(ml/min per1.73 m
2)Change in SCr
during next
7 daysGFR during
next
3 months Diagnosis
o60 41.5/C2 NA AKI + CKD
o60 o1.5/C2 435% decrease AKD without
AKI + CKD
o60 o1.5/C2 o35% decrease CKD
GFR assessed from measured or estimated GFR. Estimated GFR does not reflect
measured GFR in AKI as accurately as in CKD.
AKD, acute kidney diseases and disorders; AKI, acute kidney injury; CKD, chronic
kidney disease; GFR, glomerular filtration rate; NKD, no known kidney disease;SCr, serum creatinine.
Kidney International Supplements (2012) 2, 19–36
33
The answer to Question 1 requires ascertainment of an
index GFR/SCr as well during the prior 3 months. The index
GFR/SCr can be assigned as any of the GFR/SCr measures
during the interval of observation. The answer classiﬁespatients into three categories: NKD, AKD, and CKD.
Question 2 requires repeat ascertainment of kidney functionafter the index measure. ‘‘No’’ indicates that the increase in
SCr or decrease in GFR after the index measure does not
Figure 6 |Chronic Kidney Disease Epidemiology Collaboration cohort changes in eGFR and final eGFR corresponding to KDIGO
definition and stages of AKI. Panels (a ) and (b ) show the final eGFR and the percent changes in eGFR, respectively, corresponding to the
KDIGO definition and stages of AKI. The horizontal line in panel a and b indicates the threshold value for AKD ( o60 ml/min per 1.73 m2and
435% reduction in initial GFR, respectively). Points above the horizontal line indicate subjects who meet the SCr criteria for the definition of
AKI but do not meet eGFR criteria for the definition of AKD. AKD, acute kidney disorder/disease; AKI, acute kidney injury; eGFR, estimated
glomerular filtration rate; KDIGO, Kidney Disease: Improving Global Outcomes; SCr, serum creatinine. (Lesley Inker, personalcommunication.)
Is GFR decreased or is serum creatinine increased ?
No Yes
>3 mo
NKDYes
<3 mo or
unknown
CKD
Is Scr increasing or GFR decreasing ?1
2GFR/S cr
AKIAKD
without
AKICKDCKD+
AKICKD +AKD
without AKINKDYes-I Yes-I No No Yes-D Yes-D
Yes-D, change in Scr meets AKD criteria but not AKI criteriaAKIAKD
without
AKIYes-I No
AKD
without
AKI
Does the decrease in GFR or increase in Scr
resolve within 3 months?3CKD+
AKD without
AKICKD+
AKIAKD
without
AKIAKI
No
CKD
StableNo Yes
CKD
StableNo Yes No Yes
NKD NKDAKD
CKD
WorseCKD
WorseCKD
NewCKD
NewYes-D
Yes
Figure 7 |GFR/SCr algorithm. See text for description. AKD, acute kidney disease/disorder; AKI, acute kidney injury; CKD, chronic kidney
disease; GFR, glomerular filtration rate; NKD, no known kidney disease; SCr, serum creatinine.
34 Kidney International Supplements (2012) 2, 19–36chapter 2.5
meet AKI or AKD criteria; ‘‘Yes-D’’ indicates that increase in
SCr and decrease in GFR meets the AKD criteria but not AKIcriteria; and ‘‘Yes-I’’ indicates that increase in SCr meets AKIcriteria. Question 3 requires repeat ascertainment of GFR/SCr 3 months after the index measure. ‘‘Yes’’ indicates GFR460, indicating NKD. No indicates GFR o60, and based on
prior level of GFR, may indicate stable, new, or worse CKD.
Oliguria as a measure of kidney function
Although urine ﬂow rate is a poor measure of kidneyfunction, oliguria generally reﬂects a decreased GFR. If GFR
is normal (approximately 125 ml/min, corresponding to
approximately 107 ml/kg/h for a 70-kg adult), then reductionin urine volume to o0.5 ml/kg/h would reﬂect reabsorption
of more than 99.5% of glomerular ﬁltrate. Such profoundstimulation of tubular reabsorption usually accompaniescirculatory disturbances associated with decreased GFR.Oliguria is unusual in the presence of a normal GFR and isusually associated with the non–steady state of solute balance
and rising SCr sufﬁcient to achieve the criteria for AKI. As a
corollary, if GFR and SCr are normal and stable over aninterval of 24 hours, it is generally not necessary to measureurine ﬂow rate in order to assess kidney function.
In principle, oliguria (as deﬁned by the criteria for AKI)
can occur without a decrease in GFR. For example, lowintake of ﬂuid and solute could lead to urine volume of lessthan 0.5 ml/kg/h for 6 hours or 0.3 ml/kg/h for 24 hours. On
the other hand, severe GFR reduction in CKD usually does
not lead to oliguria until after the initiation of dialysis.
As described in Chapter 2.1, the thresholds for urine ﬂow
for the deﬁnition of AKI have been derived empirically andare less well substantiated than the thresholds for increasein SCr. Urinary diagnostic indices, such as the urinaryconcentrations of sodium and creatinine and the fractionalreabsorption of sodium and urea, remain helpful to
distinguish among causes of AKI, but are not used in the
deﬁnition (see Appendix D).
Kidney damage
Table 13 describes measures of kidney damage in AKD andCKD. Kidney damage is most commonly ascertained byurinary markers and imaging studies. Most markers andabnormal images can indicate AKD or CKD, based on the
duration of abnormality. One notable exception is small
kidneys, either bilateral or unilateral, indicating CKD, whichare discussed separately below. Kidney damage is not acriterion for AKI; however, it may be present. Renal tubularepithelial cells and coarse granular casts, often pigmented anddescribed as ‘‘muddy brown’’ , remain helpful in distinguish-ing the cause of AKI, but are not part of the deﬁnition.
Small kidneys as a marker of kidney damage
Loss of renal cortex is considered a feature of CKD, and isoften sought as a speciﬁc diagnostic sign of CKD. Kidney sizeis most often evaluated by ultrasound. In a study of 665normal volunteers,
69median renal lengths were 11.2 cm onthe left side and 10.9 cm on the right side. Renal sizedecreased with age, almost entirely because of parenchymalreduction. The lowest 10
thpercentiles for length of the left
and right kidney were approximately 10.5 and 10.0 cm,respectively, at age 30 years, and 9.5 and 9.0 cm, respectively,at age 70 years.
Integrated approach to AKI, AKD, and CKD
Clinical evaluation is necessary for all patients withalterations in kidney function or structure. The expectationof the Work Group is that the diagnostic approach willusually begin with assessment of GFR and SCr. However,evaluation of kidney function and structure is not completeunless markers of kidney damage—including urinalysis,examination of the urinary sediment, and imaging studies—
have been performed. Table 14 shows a summary of the
diagnostic approach using measures for kidney functionand structure. Based on interpretation of each measureseparately, the clinical diagnosis indicated by an ‘‘X’’ can bereached.Table 13 | Markers of kidney damage in AKD and CKD
Markers AKD CKD
Pathology X X
Urinary markers
RBC/casts X X
WBC/casts X X
RTE/casts X X
Fine and coarse granular casts X X
Proteinuria X X
Blood markers (tubular syndromes) X X
Imaging
Large kidneys X X
Small kidneys — X
Size discrepancy — X
Hydronephrosis X X
Cysts X X
Stones X X
History of kidney transplantation — X
Kidney damage is not required for diagnosis of AKI. In the presence of AKI, findings
of kidney damage do not indicate a separate diagnosis of AKD.
AKD, acute kidney diseases and disorders; CKD, chronic kidney disease; RBC, red
blood cells; RTE, renal tubular epithelial cells; WBC, white blood cells.
Table 14 | Integrated approach to interpret measures of
kidney function and structure for diagnosis of AKI, AKD, and
CKD
Measures
Diagnosis GFR/SCr Oliguria Kidney damage Small kidneys
AKI X X
AKD X X
CKD X X X X
X indicates that the measures can contribute to the diagnosis indicated.
AKD, acute kidney diseases and disorders; AKI, acute kidney injury; CKD, chronic
kidney disease.
Kidney International Supplements (2012) 2, 19–36 35chapter 2.5
SPONSORSHIP
KDIGO gratefully acknowledges the following sponsors that
make our initiatives possible: Abbott, Amgen, Belo Founda-tion, Coca-Cola Company, Dole Food Company, Genzyme,Hoffmann-LaRoche, JC Penney, NATCO—The Organizationfor Transplant Professionals, NKF—Board of Directors,Novartis, Robert and Jane Cizik Foundation, Shire, Trans-western Commercial Services, and Wyeth. KDIGO is
supported by a consortium of sponsors and no funding is
accepted for the development of speciﬁc guidelines.
DISCLAIMER
While every effort is made by the publishers, editorial board,and ISN to see that no inaccurate or misleading data, opinionor statement appears in this Journal, they wish to makeit clear that the data and opinions appearing in the articlesand advertisements herein are the responsibility of thecontributor, copyright holder, or advertiser concerned.Accordingly, the publishers and the ISN, the editorial boardand their respective employers, ofﬁce and agents accept noliability whatsoever for the consequences of any suchinaccurate or misleading data, opinion or statement. Whileevery effort is made to ensure that drug doses and otherquantities are presented accurately, readers are advised thatnew methods and techniques involving drug usage, and
described within this Journal, should only be followed in
conjunction with the drug manufacturer’s own publishedliterature.
SUPPLEMENTARY MATERIAL
Appendix D: Evaluation and General Management Guidelines for
Patients with AKI.
Supplementary material is linked to the online version of the paper at
http://www.kdigo.org/clinical_practice_guidelines/AKI.php
36 Kidney International Supplements (2012) 2, 19–36chapter 2.5
Section 3: Prevention and Treatment of AKI
Kidney International Supplements (2012) 2,37– 68; doi:10.1038/kisup.2011.33
Chapter 3.1: Hemodynamic monitoring and support
for prevention and management of AKI
As discussed in Chapters 2.3 and Appendix D, patients with
AKI and at increased risk for AKI require careful attention tobe paid to their hemodynamic status. This is ﬁrst becausehypotension results in decreased renal perfusion and, if severeor sustained, may result in kidney injury. Second, the injured
kidney loses autoregulation of blood ﬂow, a mechanism that
maintains relatively constant ﬂow despite changes in pressureabove a certain point (roughly, a mean of 65 mm Hg).
Management of blood pressure and cardiac output
require careful titration of ﬂuids and vasoactive medication.Vasopressors can further reduce blood ﬂow to the tissues ifthere is insufﬁcient circulating blood volume. Conversely,patients with AKI are also at increased risk for ﬂuid overload
(see Chapter 3.2) and continued ﬂuid resuscitation despite
increased intravascular volume can cause harm. Fluids andvasoactive medications should be managed carefully and inconcert with hemodynamic monitoring. Hemodynamicevaluation and monitoring are discussed in Appendix D.
In this chapter therapies aimed at correcting hemo-
dynamic instability will be discussed. Available therapies tomanage hypotension include ﬂuids, vasopressors and proto-
cols which integrate these therapies with hemodynamic goals.
There is an extensive body of literature in this ﬁeld and for abroader as well as more in depth review the reader is directedto the various reviews and textbooks devoted to critical careand nephrology.
70–81
FLUIDS
3.1.1: In the absence of hemorrhagic shock, we suggest
using isotonic crystalloids rather than colloids(albumin or starches) as initial management forexpansion of intravascular volume in patients atrisk for AKI or with AKI. ( 2B)
RATIONALE
Despite the recognition of volume depletion as an importantrisk factor for AKI, there are no randomized controlled trials(RCTs) that have directly evaluated the role of ﬂuids vs.placebo in the prevention of AKI, except in the ﬁeld of
contrast-induced acute kidney injury (CI-AKI) (see Chapter
4.4). It is accepted that optimization of the hemodynamicstatus and correction of any volume deﬁcit will have asalutary effect on kidney function, will help minimize furtherextension of the kidney injury, and will potentially facilitaterecovery from AKI with minimization of any residual func-tional impairment. AKI is characterized by a continuum
of volume responsiveness through unresponsiveness
(Figure 8),
78,82and large multicenter studies have shown
that a positive ﬂuid balance is an important factor associatedwith increased 60-day mortality.
78,83,84
The amount and selection of the type of ﬂuid that should
be used in the resuscitation of critically ill patients is stillcontroversial. This guideline focuses on the selection of theﬂuid (colloid vs. crystalloid ﬂuid in the prevention and early
management of AKI). The three main end-points of the
studies explored were the effects on mortality, need for RRT,and—if possible—the incidence of AKI. Although manytrials have been conducted to compare ﬂuid types forresuscitation, studies without AKI outcomes were notsystematically reviewed for this Guideline. Suppl Table 1summarizes the RCTs examining the effect of starch for theprevention of AKI.
Albumin vs. Saline
The role of albumin physiology in critically ill patients, andthe pros and cons for administering albumin to hypoalbu-
minemic patients, have recently been discussed.
85Results of
the Saline vs. Albumin Fluid Evaluation (SAFE) study, a RCT
comparing 4% human albumin in 0.9% saline with isotonicsaline in ICU patients, seem to indicate that albumin is safe,albeit no more effective than isotonic saline (the standard ofcare choice of isotonic sodium chloride in most centers) forﬂuid resuscitation. SAFE demonstrated further no differencein renal outcomes, at least based on the need for and
duration of RRT.
86The SAFE study was a double-blind study
and it was noted that patients in the albumin arm received
27% less study ﬂuid compared to the saline arm (2247 vs.3096 ml) and were approximately 1 l less positive in overallﬂuid balance.
86Furthermore, very few patients in the trial
received large volume ﬂuid resuscitation ( 45 l) and thus the
results may not be applicable to all patients. The Work Groupnoted that while isotonic crystalloids may be appropriate for
initial management of intravascular ﬂuid deﬁcits, colloids
may still have a role in patients requiring additional ﬂuid.http://www.kidney-international.org chapter 3.1
&2012 KDIGO
Kidney International Supplements (2012) 2, 37–68 37
Hydroxyethylstarch vs. Saline
Hydroxyethylstarch (HES) is a widely used, relatively
inexpensive alternative to human albumin for correcting
hypovolemia. Different HES preparations are available that
vary with regard to concentration, mean molecular weight(MW), molar substitution, and substitution of hydroxyethylfor hydroxyl groups. The mean MW of the different HESpreparations ranges between 70 000 and 670 000 Da. Thecolloid osmotic pressure effect is strongly dependent uponthe concentration of colloid in the solution; e.g., 6% HES isiso-oncotic, whereas 10% HES is hyperoncotic. The number
of hydroxyethyl groups per glucose molecule is speciﬁed by
the molar substitution, ranging between 0.4 (tetrastarch)and 0.7 (heptastarch). Accordingly, HES solutions with amolar substitution of 0.5 or 0.6 are referred to as‘‘pentastarch’’ or ‘‘hexastarch’’ , respectively. More recently,tetrastarches (HES 130/0.4 and HES 130/0.42) have also beenintroduced.
87High molecular substitution starch may impair
coagulation by reducing the concentration of factor VIII:
VIIIc and von Willebrand factor. Platelet activity may also be
affected by blockade of the platelet ﬁbrinogen receptorglycoprotein IIb/IIIa. Smaller starch molecules and thosewith less molecular substitution produce negligible coagula-tion defects.
88
Aside from these negative effects on coagulation, develop-
ment of renal dysfunction has been a concern associated withthe use of mainly hypertonic HES. Hypertonic HES may
induce a pathological entity known as ‘‘osmotic nephrosis’’
with potential impairment of renal function.
89It has even
been recommended that ‘‘HES should be avoided in ICUsand during the perioperative period’’ (for a summary of thiscontroversy, see de Saint-Aurin et al.
90and Vincent91).
The ﬁrst major randomized trial in patients with sepsis
compared HES 200/0.60 to 0.66 with gelatin and showed agreater incidence of AKI in the HES group, but no effect onsurvival.
92Criticisms of this study include a higher baseline
SCr level in the HES group, small sample size, and shortfollow-up duration of 34 days. In the Efﬁcacy of Volume
Substitution and Insulin Therapy in Severe Sepsis (VISEP)
study,
93patients with severe sepsis were randomly assigned to
receive a hypertonic (10%) solution of low MW HES (HES200/0.5), or an isotonic modiﬁed Ringer’s lactate solution.Patients in the HES group received a median cumulative doseof 70.4 ml per kilogram of body weight. The mortality wasnot signiﬁcantly different, although showing a trend towardgreater mortality at 90 days. However, the hypertonic HES
group had a signiﬁcantly higher rate of AKI (34.9% vs.
22.8%) and more days on which RRT was required (SupplTable 1). Also, this study has been criticized for: i) using ahyperoncotic colloid solution with potentially harmful renaleffects as shown in experimental research;
94ii) markedly
exceeding the pharmaceutically recommended daily doselimit for 10% HES 200/0.5 by more than 10% in 438% of
patients; and iii) pre-existing renal dysfunction in 10% of
study patients, which represents a contra-indication for
infusion of 10% HES 200/0.5.
95Posthoc analyses of the
VISEP study showed the cumulative dose of HES to be asigniﬁcant independent predictor for both mortality andRRT at 90 days. The median cumulative dose of HES in theVISEP Study was 70 ml/kg compared to 31 ml/kg in the studyby Schortgen et al.
92
A systematic review of RCTs on the use of HES for ﬂuid
management in patients with sepsis totaling 1062 patients,including 537 patients from the VISEP study, showed analmost two-fold increased risk of AKI with HES compared tocrystalloids.
96Given these limitations, the results of these
studies should be interpreted with caution. Furthermore, alarge, prospective observational study found that HESinfusion of any type (median volume 555 ml/d; intraquartilerange 500–1000) did not represent an independent risk factor
for renal impairment.
97; however, recently in a large cohort of
critically ill patients (approximately 8000 subjects), infusion
of 10% HES 200/0.5 instead of HES 130/0.4 appeared to bean independent risk factor for RRT.
87Finally, a recent
comprehensive Cochrane review98concluded that there is no
evidence from RCTs that resuscitation with colloids, insteadof crystalloids, reduces the risk of death in patients withtrauma, burns, or following surgery.
The mechanisms of colloid-induced renal injury are
incompletely understood, but may involve both directmolecular effects and effects of elevated oncotic pressure.
99
These concerns have led to the widespread adoption of lowerMW starches as iso-oncotic solution, as resuscitation ﬂuids.Theoretically, such solutions may have lower nephrotoxicity;however, as yet, no appropriately powered prospectiverandomized studies have reported the clinical beneﬁt and
Figure 8 |Conceptual model for development and clinical
course of AKI. The concept of AKI includes both volume-
responsive and volume-unresponsive conditions. These
conditions are not mutually exclusive, and a given patient mayprogress from one to the other. Time runs along the x-axis, andthe figure depicts a closing ‘‘therapeutic window’’ as injuryevolves and kidney function worsens. Biomarkers of injury and
function will begin to manifest as the condition worsens, but
traditional markers of function (e.g., urea nitrogen and creatinine)will lag behind hypothetical ‘‘sensitive’’ markers of kidney injury.Mortality increases as kidney function declines. AKI, acute kidneyinjury. Reproduced from Himmelfarb J, Joannidis M, Molitoris B,et al . Evaluation and initial management of acute kidney injury.
Clin J Am Soc Nephrol 2008; 3: 962– 967 with permission fromAmerican Society of Nephrology
82conveyed through Copyright
Clearance Center, Inc; accessed http://cjasn.asnjournals.org/content/3/4/962.long
38 Kidney International Supplements (2012) 2, 37–68chapter 3.1
safety of such solutions in comparison with crystalloids. A
recent study by Magder et al. compared 10% 250/0.45 HES to
isotonic saline in 262 patients who underwent cardiacsurgery.
100These investigators tested whether fewer patients
required catecholamines the morning after cardiac surgery(a chief determinant of ICU discharge) with HES comparedto saline, and found indeed this was the case (10.9% vs.28.8%; P¼0.001). Importantly, the study found no evidence
of nephrotoxicity: no difference in the daily creatinine, deve-lopment of AKI by RIFLE criteria during hospital stay (16%in both groups), or need for RRT (1% in each group).Importantly, patients in the saline group received nearly 60%more volume for ﬂuid resuscitation in the ICU compared toHES (887 vs. 1397 ml; Po0.0001). While overall volumes
were small, advocates for colloid resuscitation will note thatthis is exactly the reason colloids are preferred for patients
requiring large-volume resuscitation.
The tonicity of colloid preparations may also vary by
agent. A recent meta-analysis
101described 11 randomized
trials with a total of 1220 patients: seven evaluating
hyperoncotic albumin and four evaluating hyperoncoticstarch. Hyperoncotic albumin decreased the odds of AKI by76% while hyperoncotic starch increased those odds by 92%(odds ratio [OR] 1.92; CI 1.31–2.81; P¼0.0008). Parallel
effects on mortality were observed. This meta-analysis con-cluded that the renal effects of hyperoncotic colloid solutionsappear to be colloid-speciﬁc, with albumin displayingrenoprotection and hyperoncotic starch showing nephro-toxicity. A 7000-patient study comparing 6% HES 130/0.4 insaline with saline alone was scheduled to begin in Australiaand New Zealand in 2010. This study will provide furtherhigh-quality data to help guide clinical practice.
102
Thus, the use of isotonic saline as the standard of care for
intravascular volume expansion to prevent or treat AKI isbased upon the lack of clear evidence that colloids aresuperior for this purpose, along with some evidence thatspeciﬁc colloids may cause AKI, in addition to higher costs. Itis acknowledged that colloids may be chosen in some patientsto aid in reaching resuscitation goals, or to avoid excessiveﬂuid administration in patients requiring large volume
resuscitation, or in speciﬁc patient subsets (e.g., a cirrhotic
patient with spontaneous peritonitis, or in burns). Similarly,although hypotonic or hypertonic crystalloids may be used inspeciﬁc clinical scenarios, the choice of crystalloid withaltered tonicity is generally dictated by goals other thanintravascular volume expansion (e.g., hypernatremia orhyponatremia). One of the concerns with isotonic saline isthat this solution contains 154 mmol/l chloride and that
administration in large volumes will result in relative or
absolute hyperchloremia (for a review, see Kaplan et al.
103).
Although direct proof of harm arising from saline-inducedhyperchloremia is lacking, buffered salt solutions approxi-mate physiological chloride concentrations and their admin-istration is less likely to cause acid-base disturbances.Whether use of buffered solutions results in better outcomesis, however, uncertain.VASOPRESSORS
3.1.2: We recommend the use of vasopressors in conjunc-
tion with ﬂuids in patients with vasomotor shockwith, or at risk for, AKI. ( 1C)
RATIONALE
Sepsis and septic shock are major contributing factors toAKI
7and vasopressor requirement appears to be highly
associated with AKI in this population. Despite the highprevalence of AKI during critical illness in general, and severesepsis speciﬁcally, success has been limited in improving the
outcome of this complication.
104Septic shock is the proto-
type of a high output–low resistance condition, although
severe pancreatitis, anaphylaxis, burns, and liver failureshare similar physiologic alterations. Persistent hypotension,despite ongoing aggressive ﬂuid resuscitation or afteroptimization of intravascular volume in patients with shock,places patients at risk for development of AKI. In the settingof vasomotor paralysis, preservation or improvement of
renal perfusion can only be achieved through use of
systemic vasopressors once intravascular volume has beenrestored.
105
It is not known which vasopressor agent is most effective
for prevention or treatment of patients with AKI and septicshock. Most studies have focused on norepinephrine,dopamine, or vasopressin. Small open-label studies haveshown improvement in creatinine clearance (CrCl) following
a 6- to 8-hour infusion of norepinephrine
106or terlipres-
sin,107while vasopressin reduced the need for norepinephrine
and increased urine output and CrCl.108A large RCT109
comparing dopamine to norepinephrine as initial vasopres-
sor in patients with shock showed no signiﬁcant differencesbetween groups with regard to renal function or mortality.However, there were more arrhythmic events among thepatients treated with dopamine than among those treated
with norepinephrine, and a subgroup analysis showed that
dopamine was associated with an increased rate of death at28 days among the patients with cardiogenic shock, but notamong the patients with septic shock or those with hypo-volemic shock. Thus, although there was no difference inprimary outcome with dopamine as the ﬁrst-line vasopressoragent and those who were treated with norepinephrine, theuse of dopamine was associated with a greater number of
adverse events.
109
Vasopressin is gaining popularity in the treatment of
shock refractory to norepinephrine.110Compared to nor-
epinephrine, it increases blood pressure and enhances
dieresis, but has not as yet been proven to enhance survivalnor to reduce the need for RRT.
111A recent posthoc analysis
of the above mentioned RCT used the RIFLE criteria for AKIto compare the effects of vasopressin vs. norepinephrine.
112
In patients in the RIFLE-R category, vasopressin as comparedto norepinephrine was associated with a trend to a lower rateof progression to F or L categories respectively, and a lower
Kidney International Supplements (2012) 2, 37–68 39chapter 3.1
rate of use of RRT. Mortality rates in the R category patients
treated with vasopressin compared to norepinephrine were30.8 vs. 54.7%, P¼0.01, but this did not reach signiﬁcance in
a multiple logistic regression analysis. This study suggeststhus that vasopressin may reduce progression to renal failureand mortality in patients at risk of kidney injury who haveseptic shock. The Work Group concluded that currentclinical data are insufﬁcient to conclude that one vasoactive
agent is superior to another in preventing AKI, but
emphasized that vasoactive agents should not be withheldfrom patients with vasomotor shock over concern for kidneyperfusion. Indeed, appropriate use of vasoactive agents canimprove kidney perfusion in volume-resuscitated patientswith vasomotor shock.
PROTOCOLIZED HEMODYNAMIC MANAGEMENT
3.1.3: We suggest using protocol-based management of
hemodynamic and oxygenation parameters to
prevent development or worsening of AKI in
high-risk patients in the perioperative setting ( 2C)
or in patients with septic shock ( 2C).
RATIONALE
A resuscitation strategy devised for patients with hypotensionfrom septic shock that is based upon achieving speciﬁcphysiologic end-points within 6 hours of hospital admis-sion has been termed Early Goal-Directed Therapy (EGDT).This approach has been endorsed by the ‘‘SurvivingSepsis Campaign’’
113and has gained considerable acceptance
despite only one, single-center, RCT evaluating its effective-ness. This protocolized strategy, consisting of ﬂuids, vaso-active medication, and blood transfusions targeting physio-logical parameters, is recommended by many experts for theprevention of organ injury in septic-shock patients.
Similarly, protocolized care strategies in surgical patients
at high risk for postoperative AKI have been extensivelystudied in an effort to provide optimal oxygen delivery to
tissues in the perioperative period. In these patients, goal-
directed therapy is deﬁned as hemodynamic monitoring withdeﬁned target values and with a time limit to reach thesestated goals. Together these protocols with bundled, hemo-dynamic, and tissue-support measures have the potential toreduce the risk of AKI following major surgical proceduresin high-risk patients (e.g., age 460 years, emergent surgery,
elevated American Society of Anesthesiologists score,
preoperative comorbid illnesses).
Protocolized hemodynamic management strategies
in septic shock
Early ﬂuid resuscitation in the management of hypotensive
patients with septic shock has been a standard treatmentparadigm for decades.
93,113,114What has not been clear,
however, is how much ﬂuid to give, for how long, or what
type of ﬂuid therapy is optimal in the physiologic support ofseptic shock.93,113,114In 2001, Rivers et al.115published the
results of a small (n ¼263), open-label, single-center study
that compared a treatment protocol that the authors referred
to as EGDT in the emergency management of septic shock.EGDT is predicated upon the premise that an early,protocolized resuscitation program with predeﬁned physio-logic end-points will prevent organ failure and improve theoutcome of patients presenting with septic shock.
Hypotensive patients with severe infection are rapidly
assessed for evidence of tissue hypoperfusion and micro-circulatory dysfunction by mean arterial blood pressuremeasurement and plasma lactate levels.
115Blood lactate levels
are neither sensitive nor speciﬁc but are readily availablemeasures of tissue hypoperfusion and do correlate withadverse outcomes in sepsis.
116,117Early recognition of septic
shock then initiates a protocol of resuscitation with the goal
of reestablishing tissue perfusion in patients within 6 hours of
diagnosis. The physiologic goals are: i) return of meanarterial blood pressure to X65 mm Hg; ii) central venous
pressure between 8– 12 mm Hg; iii) improvement in bloodlactate levels; iv) central venous oxygen saturation (ScvO
2)
470%; and v) a urine output of X0.5 ml/kg/h.
In the study by Rivers et al. the protocol-driven process
resulted in more rapid use of ﬂuids, more blood transfusions,
and in a small number of patients, earlier use of dobutamine
over the 6-hour time period than standard emergency care.The in-hospital mortality rate in the control group was46.5% vs. 30.5% in the EGDT group ( Po0.01).
115Follow-up,
predominantly observational studies, have found less dra-matic but generally similar effects,
118–122though not without
exception.123
The Rivers study did not speciﬁcally look at AKI out-
comes, but multiple-organ function-scoring systems (i.e.,APACHE II and SAPS 2) both showed signiﬁcant improve-ments with EGDT. In a subsequent study, prevention ofAKI was signiﬁcantly improved in patients randomized to amodiﬁed EGDT strategy (without measurement of ScvO
2)
compared to a standard-care group.119Criticisms of the
Rivers study include: i) a complex, multistep protocol forwhich individual interventions have not been validated; ii)
the use of a treatment team in the active-therapy arm, thus
risking a Hawthorn effect; iii) high mortality in the standard-care arm; and iv) the study was a small single-center study.Three large multicenter clinical trials in the USA, UK, andAustralia are currently underway to deﬁnitively evaluate thispromising therapy.
Goal-directed therapy for hemodynamic support during
the perioperative period in high-risk surgical patients
Efforts to improve tissue oxygen delivery by optimizing
hemodynamic support in high-risk surgical patients toprevent AKI and other adverse patient outcomes have beeninvestigated for many years.
124–126A recent meta-analysis of
these studies by Brienza et al.127concluded that protocolized
therapies (regardless of the protocol) with speciﬁc physio-
logical goals can signiﬁcantly reduce postoperative AKI.
40 Kidney International Supplements (2012) 2, 37–68chapter 3.1
A major problem in interpreting these studies is the lack of
standardized hemodynamic and tissue oxygenation targetsand management strategies used to verify the efﬁcacy of thesemeasures over standard perioperative care. A heterogeneouscollection of study populations, types of surgical procedures,monitoring methods, and treatment strategies comprise thisrecent meta-analysis.
127The basic strategy of goal-directed
therapy to prevent AKI in the perioperative period is based
on protocols that avoid hypotension, optimize oxygen
delivery, and include careful ﬂuid management, vasopressorswhen indicated, and inotropic agents and blood products ifneeded.
127
The relative merits and risk:beneﬁt ratio of each discrete
element of EGDT in the successful resuscitation of patientswith septic shock requires further study. Given the limita-tions of the current studies and lack of comparative
effectiveness studies comparing individual protocols, we
can only conclude that protocols for resuscitation in thesetting of septic shock and high-risk surgery appear to besuperior to no protocol.
RESEARCH RECOMMENDATIONS
KRandomized trials of isotonic crystalloid vs. colloidtherapy for intravascular volume expansion to prevent
or treat AKI should be conducted in a variety of settings
(critical illness, high-risk surgery, sepsis), includingpatient subsets. In particular, colloids may improveefficiency of fluid resuscitation but some (starch) alsocarry some concerns regarding effects on the kidneys. Ifcolloid results in less volume overload, it may lead toimproved outcomes.
KComparisons of specific solutions, with specific electrolyte
composition or colloid type, for effectiveness in preventing
AKI should be conducted. Specifically, there is a need toexamine physiologic electrolyte solutions vs. saline.KStudies are needed that compare different types ofvasopressors for prevention and treatment of AKI inhemodynamically unstable patients. Some evidencesuggests that certain vasopressors may preserve renalfunction better than others (e.g., vasopressin analoguesvs. catecholamines) and studies are needed to comparethem in this setting.
KThe choice of a target mean arterial perfusion pressure
range of 65–90 mm Hg as a component of resuscitation
(perhaps in the context of age, chronic blood pressure, orother comorbidities) also needs further study.
KThe specific components of goal-directed therapy thataccrue benefits for patients at risk for AKI need to bedetermined. Is it the timing of protocolized hemodynamicmanagement that is beneficial: prophylactically in high-risk surgical patients, or early in the course of severe sepsis?
In contrast to the benefits of prophylactic or EGDT,
protocolized use of inotropes to normalize mixed venousoxygen saturation or supranormalize oxygen delivery in‘‘late’’ critical illness did not result in decreased AKI
128or
improved outcomes.128,129Alternatively, is it attention
to hemodynamic monitoring, the protocol itself thatstandardizes supportive care to achieve the stated goals, ora single or combination of the multiple possible interven-
tions that improves outcome? Thus, further research is
required to determine the specific components of goal-directed therapy that accrue benefits for patients at risk forAKI, if such benefits actually occur.
SUPPLEMENTARY MATERIAL
Supplementary Table 1: Summary table of RCTs examining the effect
of starch for the prevention of AKI.
Appendix D: Evaluation and General Management Guidelines for
Patients with AKI.
Supplementary material is linked to the online version of the paper at
http://www.kdigo.org/clinical_practice_guidelines/AKI.php
Kidney International Supplements (2012) 2, 37–68 41chapter 3.1
Chapter 3.2: General supportive management of
patients with AKI, including management of
complications
Supportive management to prevent AKI was discussed in the
previous chapter and, for many patients, many of the supportive
therapies will continue even if AKI develops. Furthermore,
an important goal of early management of AKI is to preventfurther injury and to facilitate recovery of renal function. Thesegoals can often best be achieved by strict attention to supportivetherapy. However, as renal function deteriorates, complicationsarise that require different management. Some of these issueshave been discussed in Chapter 2.3 and several books havebeen devoted, in large part, to management of the manycomplications that arise from AKI
130– 133; the reader is referred
to these sources. Particular attention should be given to the
assessment of the circulating vol ume and ﬂuid administration,
the prevention and/or treatment of hyperkalemia and metabolic
acidosis, the knowledge of the changes in pharmacokinetics ofmany drugs with discontinuation of all potentially nephrotoxicdrugs, and dose adaptation of drugs excreted by the kidneys tothe patient’s renal function. Finally, many of the other chaptersin this section of the guideline deal with supportive measures(e.g., diuretics for ﬂuid management).http://www.kidney-international.org chapter 3.2
&2012 KDIGO
42 Kidney International Supplements (2012) 2, 37–68
Chapter 3.3: Glycemic control and nutritional support
GLYCEMIC CONTROL IN CRITICAL ILLNESS: RENAL EFFECTS
AND OUTCOMES
3.3.1: In critically ill patients, we suggest insulin
therapy targeting plasma glucose 110– 149 mg/dl
(6.1–8.3 mmol/l). ( 2C)
RATIONALE
As outlined in a recent review,134stress hyperglycemia is a
distinctive clinical feature of critical illness. Stress mediators,and central and peripheral insulin resistance appears pivotalto the occurrence of stress hyperglycemia. Inﬂammatorymediators and counter-regulatory hormones have beenshown to impede crucial elements of the insulin-signalingpathway. Still, exogenous insulin administration normalizesblood glucose levels in this setting. Insulin treatment may
counteract hepatic insulin resistance during acute critical
illness. Extensive observational data have shown a consistent,almost linear, relationship between blood glucose levels inpatients hospitalized with MI and adverse clinical outcomes,even in patients without established diabetes.
135,136
It has never been entirely clear, however, whether glycemia
serves as a mediator of these outcomes or merely as a markerof the sickest patients, who present with the well-known
counter-regulatory stress response to illness.
137Interestingly,
Kosiborod et al.135recently showed, in a population with MI,
that while hypoglycemia was associated with increased
mortality, this risk was conﬁned to patients who developedspontaneous hypoglycemia. In contrast, iatrogenic hypo-glycemia after insulin therapy was not associated with highermortality risk.
Tight glycemic control is frequently used in patients at risk
of AKI, and in the management of those who develop AKI. Ithas been proposed that tight glycemic control can reduce theincidence and severity of AKI. Since the landmark trial of Vanden Berghe et al .,
138additional studies provided initial
conﬁrmation of the beneﬁts (reduced morbidity andmortality), and some additional mechanistic insights of tightglycemic control in critically ill patients.
139Further secondary
analysis of the original trial, which was conducted in 1548
mechanically ventilated surgical ICU patients, found that
intensive insulin therapy (IIT) target plasma glucose80– 110 mg/dl (4.44–6.11 mmol/l) was associated with sub-stantial cost savings compared to conventional insulintherapy (CIT) target plasma glucose 180–200 mg/dl (9.99–11.1 mmol/l).
140However, when Van den Berghe et al .
repeated their original study in a different population ofcritically ill patients (medical rather than surgical ICUpatients), the primary end-point of in-hospital mortality
did not differ between groups (40% CIT group vs. 37.3% IIT
group; P¼0.33).
141As in the original surgical ICU study, a
variety of secondary end-points were improved in this study,including a lower incidence of AKI and need for RRT. In theoriginal surgical ICU study, severe AKI (peak SCr 42.5 mg/dl
[4221mmol/l]) developed in 7.2% of the IIT group,
compared to 11.2% of the CIT group ( P¼0.04); the
incidence of RRT was also lower in the IIT group than the
CIT group (4.8% vs. 8.2%, respectively; P¼0.007).
138In the
medical ICU study, the IIT group similarly had a signiﬁcantly
lower rate of AKI (doubling of SCr, 5.4%) than the CITgroup (8.9%, P¼0.04), although RRT incidence was not
decreased.
141In a recent analysis, Schetz et al.142combined
the renal end-points of both of these trials and used a modi-ﬁed version of the RIFLE classiﬁcation of AKI to demonstratethat tight glycemic control reduced the incidence of severe
AKI (peak SCr increments two- or three-fold increased from
baseline) from 7.6% to 4.5% ( P¼0.0006) in a combined
patient population of 2707. The need for RRT was notdecreased in the overall population or the medical ICUpopulation, but was signiﬁcantly lower in the surgical ICUpatients managed with IIT (4% vs. 7.4%, P¼0.008).
Several newer studies have provided additional insight
concerning the efﬁcacy and safety of tight glycemic control in
critically ill patients.
93,95,143–146Thomas et al.145conducted a
systematic review of randomized trials of tight glycemic
control in 2864 critically ill patients, and found a 38% riskreduction of AKI with IIT, and a nonsigniﬁcant trend towardsless acute dialysis requirement. However, IIT was alsoassociated with a greater than four-fold increase in the riskof hypoglycemia. A body of literature demonstrating thatuncontrolled hyperglycemia was associated with increased
AKI following cardiac surgery led to the conduct of a 400-
patient, single-center RCT of tight vs. conventional intra-operative glucose control.
143,144The investigators found that
this approach did not decrease perioperative morbidity ormortality (included in a composite end-point that includedAKI within 30 days of surgery): the composite end-pointoccurred in 44% of the IIT group vs. 46% of the CIT group.Although the incidence of hypoglycemia was similar in the
groups, there was a signiﬁcantly higher incidence of stroke in
the IIT group (4.3%) compared to the CIT group (0.54%), aswell as trends towards higher mortality and more post-operative heart block in the IIT group, raising concerns aboutthe safety of this approach.
Further prospective comparison of IIT vs. CIT in critically
ill septic patients was provided in the VISEP trial, whichalso incorporated a comparison on crystalloid vs. colloidhttp://www.kidney-international.org chapter 3.3
&2012 KDIGO
Kidney International Supplements (2012) 2, 37–68 43
infusions in a 2 /C22 factorial design.93Patients with severe
sepsis or septic shock in 18 ICUs were randomized to IIT
(target glycemia 80– 110 mg/dl [4.44–6.11 mmol/l]; n ¼247)
or CIT (target glycemia 180–200 mg/dl [9.99–11.1 mmol/l];n¼290) (Suppl Tables 2 and 3). There were no signiﬁcant
differences in 28-day or 90-day mortality, Sequential OrganFailure Assessment scores, or AKI rates between the groups.However, hypoglycemia (blood glucose level o40 mg/dl
[o2.22 mmol/l]) was more frequent in the IIT group (12%
vs. 2%; Po0.001) and led to early termination of the IIT
study arm. Following publication of this study, Thomas et al.,
updated the meta-analysis (discussed above) to include thesedata, and reported that, with the addition of the VISEP data,the analysis of a 3397-patient group found a 36% riskreduction of AKI with IIT, but this pooled estimate was nolonger statistically signiﬁcant (relative risk [RR] 0.74; 95% CI
0.47–1.17).
95In a detailed review of the VISEP trial, Thomas
et al. , also noted that another multicenter mixed ICU trial of
intensive insulin therapy (the GLUCOCONTROL Study:
Comparing the effects of two glucose control regimens byinsulin in intensive care unit patients; available at: http://www.clinicaltrials.gov/ct/show/NCT00107601) was stoppedafter 1101 patients were enrolled because of greater rates ofhypoglycemia with IIT.
95Such data have raised signiﬁcant
concerns regarding the effectiveness and safety of using IITwith tight glycemic control to prevent or amelioratemorbidity and mortality in patients at high risk of AKI andother forms of organ injury.
The recent meta-analysis of IIT vs. CIT by Wiener et al.
146
continued to ﬁnd a greater incidence of hypoglycemia withIIT, but the balance of evidence now suggests no improve-ment in survival with this approach. Twenty-nine RCTs
totaling 8432 patients contributed data for this meta-analysis.
Twenty-seven studies reported no difference in hospitalmortality (21.6% in IIT vs 23.3% in CIT) with a pooled RRof 0.93 (95% CI 0.85–1.03; P¼NS). Nine studies reported no
difference in incidence of new RRT. There was a signiﬁcantbeneﬁt of tight glycemic control in reducing the incidence ofsepticemia but this was associated with a signiﬁcantlyincreased risk of hypoglycemia (blood glucose o40 mg/dl
[o2.22 mmol/l]) in patients randomized to IIT with a pooled
RR of 5.13 (95% CI 4.09–6.43; Po0.05).
In summary, pooled analysis of early multicenter studies
has failed to conﬁrm the early observations of beneﬁcialeffects of IIT on renal function; the risk of hypoglycemia withthis approach is signiﬁcant, and even the survival beneﬁts ofIIT are in doubt. More recently, the international Normogly-cemia in Intensive Care Evaluation and Survival Using
Glucose Algorithm Regulation (NICE-SUGAR) study, with a
targeted enrolment of 6100 patients, set out to deﬁnitivelydetermine the risk-beneﬁt comparison of tight glycemiccontrol in critically ill patients (Suppl Table 3).
147,148In this
trial, adult patients were randomized within 24 hours afteradmission to an ICU to receive either intensive glucosecontrol (target blood glucose range of 81–108 mg/dl [4.50–5.99 mmol/l]), or conventional glucose control (target ofp180 mg/dl [ p9.99 mmol/l]).
148The primary outcome was
mortality from any cause within 90 days after randomization.The two groups had similar characteristics at baseline. A totalof 829 patients (27.5%) in the intensive-control group and751 (24.9%) in the conventional-control group died (ORfor intensive control, 1.14; 95% CI 1.02–1.28; P¼0.02). The
treatment effect did not differ signiﬁcantly between surgicalpatients and medical patients. There was no signiﬁcant
difference between the two treatment groups in incidence of
new RRT (15.4% vs. 14.5%), respectively. Severe hypo-glycemia (blood glucose level p40 mg/dl [ p2.22 mmol/l])
was reported in 6.8% in the intensive-control group and in0.5% in the conventional-control group ( Po0.001). In
summary, the largest randomized trial of intensive vs.conventional insulin therapy found that intensive glucosecontrol actually increased mortality among adults in the ICU:
a blood glucose target of p180 mg/dl ( p9.99 mmol/l)
resulted in lower mortality than did a target of 81– 108 mg/
dl (4.50–5.99 mmol/l). Furthermore, this trial conﬁrmed theconsistent ﬁnding of an increased incidence of hypoglycemiaassociated with IIT, without any proven beneﬁt in reducingmortality, organ dysfunction, or bacteremia.
There were some methodological differences between the
Leuven and NICE-SUGAR studies, possibly explaining the
different outcomes.
149These comprised different target
ranges for blood glucose in control and intervention groups,
different routes for insulin administration and types of infu-sion pumps, different sampling sites, and different accuraciesof glucometers, as well as different nutritional strategies andvarying levels of expertise. Finally, Griesdale et al .
150per-
formed a meta-analysis of trials of intensive vs. conventionalglycemic control that included most of the studies in the
Wiener meta-analysis, in addition to some newer studies,
including data supplied by the NICE-SUGAR investigators.All 26 trials that reported mortality found a pooled RR ofdeath with IIT compared to CIT of 0.93 (95% CI 0.83–1.04).Among the 14 trials reporting hypoglycemia, the pooled RRwith IIT was 6.0 (95% CI 4.5–8.0). However, in subsetanalysis, patients in surgical ICUs appeared to beneﬁt fromIIT while patients in the other ICU settings (medical or
mixed) did not. Although results from the early trials were
better in studies that included surgical
138rather than purely
medical ICU patients141, and this latest meta-analysis appears
to conﬁrm that trend, it should be noted that no suchphenomenon was noted in the NICE-SUGAR trial. Overall,the data do not support the use of IIT aiming to controlplasma glucose below 110 mg/dl (6.11 mmol/l) in critically illpatients, although subset analyses suggest that further trials
may disclose beneﬁts in perioperative patients, and perhaps
through the use of less-intensive glucose control targets.
Considering the balance between potential beneﬁts and
harm (see Suppl Table 2), the Work Group suggests usinginsulin for preventing severe hyperglycemia in critically illpatients, but in view of the danger of potentially serioushypoglycemia, we recommend that the average blood glucoseshould not exceed 150 mg/dl (8.33 mmol/l), but that insulin
44 Kidney International Supplements (2012) 2, 37–68chapter 3.3
therapy should not be used to lower blood glucose to less
than 110 mg/dl (6.11 mmol/l). The Work Group recognizesthat these proposed thresholds have never directly beenexamined in RCTs but are interpolated from the comparisonstested in the trials so far.
NUTRITIONAL ASPECTS IN THE PREVENTION AND
TREATMENT OF CRITICALLY ILL PATIENTS WITH AKI
Protein-calorie malnutrition is an important independent
predictor of in-hospital mortality in patients with AKI. In aprospective study of 300 AKI patients, 42% presented withsigns of severe malnutrition on admission.
151
The nutritional management of AKI patients must
consider the metabolic derangements and proinﬂammatorystate associated with renal failure, the underlying disease
process and comorbidities, as well as the derangements in
nutrient balance caused by RRT. Very few systematic studieshave assessed the impact of nutrition on clinical end-pointsused in these guidelines (i.e., mortality, need for RRT,and incidence of AKI). Recommendations are thereforelargely based on expert opinion. Several expert panels havedeveloped clinical practice guidelines for the nutritionalmanagement of patients with AKI, whether treated with or
without RRT.
152–156A recent narrative review has also
provided updated information on this topic.157
3.3.2: We suggest achieving a total energy intake of
20– 30 kcal/kg/d in patients with any stage of AKI. ( 2C)
RATIONALE
Carbohydrate metabolism in AKI is characterized by
hyperglycemia due to peripheral insulin resistance158,159
and accelerated hepatic gluconeogenesis, mainly from con-version of amino acids released during protein catabolism
that cannot be suppressed by exogenous glucose infusions.
160
In addition, hypertriglyceridemia commonly occurs due
to inhibition of lipolysis. The clearance of exogenouslyadministered lipids can be reduced.
161The modiﬁcations of
energy metabolism are usually not caused by AKI per se but
related to acute comorbidities and complications.162Energy
consumption is not increased by AKI. Even in multiple-organfailure, the energy expenditure of critically ill patients
amounts to not more than 130% of resting energy
expenditure. The optimal energy-to-nitrogen ratio duringAKI has not been clearly determined. In a retrospective studyof AKI patients undergoing continuous venovenous hemoﬁl-tration (CVVH), less negative or weakly positive nitrogenbalance was associated with an energy intake of approxi-mately 25 kcal/kg/d.
163In a randomized trial in AKI patients
comparing 30 and 40 kcal/kg/d energy provision, the higher
energy prescription did not induce a more positive nitrogen
balance but was associated with a higher incidence ofhyperglycemia and hypertriglyceridemia and a more positiveﬂuid balance.
164These observations provide a rationale to
maintain a total energy intake of at least 20, but not morethan 25–30 kcal/kg/d, equivalent to 100–130% of restingenergy expenditure. Energy provision should be composed of3– 5 (maximum 7) g per kilogram body weight carbohydratesand 0.8–1.0 g per kilogram body weight fat.
3.3.3: We suggest to avoid restriction of protein intake
with the aim of preventing or delaying initiation of
RRT. ( 2D)
3.3.4: We suggest administering 0.8– 1.0 g/kg/d of protein
in noncatabolic AKI patients without need fordialysis ( 2D), 1.0– 1.5 g/kg/d in patients with AKI on
RRT ( 2D), and up to a maximum of 1.7 g/kg/d in
patients on continuous renal replacement therapy(CRRT) and in hypercatabolic patients. ( 2D)
RATIONALE
Protein hypercatabolism driven by inﬂammation, stress,and acidosis is a common ﬁnding in critically ill
patients.
157,165,166The optimal amount of protein supple-
mentation in AKI patients is unknown. Patients with AKI are
at high risk of malnutrition. Since malnutrition is associatedwith increased mortality in critically ill patients, nutritionalmanagement should aim at supplying sufﬁcient protein tomaintain metabolic balance. Hence, nutritional proteinadministration should not be restricted as a means toattenuate the rise in BUN associated with declining GFR. On
the other hand, there is little evidence that hypercatabolism
can be overcome simply by increasing protein intake tosupraphysiologic levels. While, in a crossover study of AKIpatients, nitrogen balance was related to protein intakeand was more likely to be positive with intakes larger than2 g/kg/d,
167only 35% of patients achieved a positive nitrogen
balance in a study applying a nutrient intake as high as2.5 g/kg/d protein.
168No outcome data are currently
available concerning the clinical efﬁcacy and the safety ofsuch high protein intakes, which may contribute to acidosisand azotemia, and increase dialysis dose requirements.
Due to their continuous nature and the high ﬁltration
rates, CRRT techniques can better control azotemia and ﬂuidoverload associated with nutritional support but may alsoresult in additional losses of water-soluble, low-molecular-weight substances, including nutrients.
169Normalized pro-
tein catabolic rates of 1.4 to 1.8 g/kg/d have been reportedin patients with AKI receiving CRRT.
170–172In a recent study
in critically ill cancer patients with AKI and treated withsustained low-efﬁciency dialysis (SLED), those with higherBUN and serum albumin levels, which were associated withinfusion of higher amount of total parenteral nutrition, had alower mortality risk.
173
In CRRT, about 0.2 g amino acids are lost per liter of
ﬁltrate, amounting to a total daily loss of 10– 15 g aminoacids. In addition, 5– 10 g of protein are lost per day,depending on the type of therapy and dialyzer membrane.Similar amounts of protein and amino acids are typically lostby peritoneal dialysis (PD). Nutritional support should
Kidney International Supplements (2012) 2, 37–68 45chapter 3.3
account for the losses related to CRRT, including PD, by
providing a maximum of 1.7 g amino acids/kg/d.
3.3.5: We suggest providing nutrition preferentially via
the enteral route in patients with AKI. ( 2C)
RATIONALE
Enteral feeding may be more difﬁcult in patients with AKI
because of impaired gastrointestinal motility and decreasedabsorption of nutrients secondary to bowel edema.
174
Moreover, multiple factors negatively affect gastrointestinal
function in critically ill patients, e.g., medications (sedatives,
opiates, catecholamines, etc.), glucose and electrolyte dis-orders, diabetes, or mechanical ventilation. However, theprovision of nutrients via the gut lumen helps maintain gutintegrity, decreases gut atrophy, and decreases bacterial andendotoxin translocation. Furthermore, AKI is a major riskfactor for gastrointestinal hemorrhage.
175Enteral nutrition
should exert protective effects on the risk of stress ulcers or
bleeding. Clinical studies have suggested that enteral feeding
is associated with improved outcome/survival in ICUpatients.
176,177Hence, enteral nutrition is the recommended
form of nutritional support for patients with AKI. If oralfeeding is not possible, then enteral feeding (tube feeding)should be initiated within 24 hours, and has been shown tobe safe and effective.
178
Pediatric considerations
In children with AKI, physiological macronutrient require-ments are age-dependent, reﬂecting the developmentaldynamics of growth and metabolism. Research exploringnutritional requirements in children with critical illness andAKI is limited to observational studies. With respect to calorieprovision, it is generally agreed that critically ill children,like adults, should receive 100– 130% of the basal energyexpenditure, which can be estimated with acceptable precisionand accuracy by the Caldwell-Kennedy equation
179: (resting
energy expenditure [kcal/kg/d] ¼22þ31.05/C2weight [kg] þ
1.16/C2age [years]).
In a recent survey of the nutritional management of 195
children with AKI on CRRT, the maximal calorie prescriptionin the course of treatment averaged 53, 31, and 21 kcal/kg/d,and that for protein intake 2.4, 1.9, and 1.3 g/kg/d in childrenagedo1, 1– 13, and 413 years, respectively.
180Although not
validated by outcome studies, these ﬁgures provide anorientation for the macronutrient supply typically achievedin and tolerated by children with AKI receiving CRRT.
RESEARCH RECOMMENDATIONS
KThe risk-benefit ratio of diets with low, medium, and
high protein contents in different stages of AKI should be
addressed in RCTs.
KGiven gastrointestinal tract dysfunction in AKI, thepossible benefit of enteral vs. parenteral feeding in AKIpatients should be further evaluated in prospective RCTs.
SUPPLEMENTARY MATERIAL
Supplementary Table 2: Evidence profile of RCTs examining insulin vs.
conventional glucose therapy for the prevention of AKI.
Supplementary Table 3: Summary table of RCTs examining the effect
of insulin for the prevention of AKI.
Supplementary material is linked to the online version of the paper at
http://www.kdigo.org/clinical_practice_guidelines/AKI.php
46 Kidney International Supplements (2012) 2, 37–68chapter 3.3
Chapter 3.4: The use of diuretics in AKI
Diuretics are frequently used in patients at risk of AKI, and in
the management of those who develop AKI. Since ﬂuid
overload is one of the major symptoms of AKI, diuretics areoften used for patients with AKI to facilitate ﬂuid manage-ment. Recent observational studies showed that 59– 70% ofpatients with AKI were given diuretics at the time ofnephrology consultation or before the start of RRT.
181,182
In addition, oliguric AKI has a worse prognosis thannonoliguric AKI and physicians often prescribe diuretics to
convert oliguric to nonoliguric AKI.
183Diuretics are also
used to control ﬂuid balance and permit administration of
nutrition and medications. Furthermore, several diureticshave potentially renoprotective effects that might preventdevelopment of AKI and hasten its recovery. However,diuretics can also be harmful, by reducing the circulatingvolume excessively and adding a prerenal insult, worseningestablished AKI. Therefore, it is essential to evaluate
usefulness of diuretics to improve outcome of patients with
AKI, not just for ﬂuid management.
3.4.1: We recommend not using diuretics to prevent
AKI. ( 1B)
3.4.2: We suggest not using diuretics to treat AKI, except
in the management of volume overload. ( 2C)
RATIONALE
Loop diuretics have several effects that may protect against
AKI. They may decrease oxygen consumption in the loop ofHenle by inhibiting sodium transport, thus potentiallylessening ischemic injury. Loop diuretics act at the luminalsurface of the thick ascending limb of the loop of Henle andinhibit the Na-K-2Cl cotransporter,
184,185resulting in a loss
of the high medullary osmolality and decreased ability toreabsorb water. Inhibition of active sodium transport alsoreduces renal tubular oxygen consumption, potentiallydecreasing ischemic damage of the most vulnerable outermedullary tubular segments;
183therefore, furosemide might
protect kidneys against ischemic injury.186Furosemide also
might hasten recovery of AKI by washing out necrotic debrisblocking tubules, and by inhibiting prostaglandin dehydro-
genase, which reduces renovascular resistance and increases
renal blood ﬂow.
186,187Based on these properties, loop
diuretics might be expected to prevent or ameliorate AKI.However, there are only minimal data to support this theory,and there is some evidence of harm associated with loopdiuretic use to prevent or treat AKI.
188–191Furosemide is the
most commonly prescribed diuretic in the acute-caresetting,
183–185and a number of RCTs have tested whetherfurosemide is beneﬁcial for prevention or treatment of AKI.
Speciﬁcally, prophylactic furosemide was found to be
ineffective or harmful when used to prevent AKI after cardiacsurgery,
189,190and to increase the risk of AKI when given to
prevent CI-AKI.191Epidemiologic data have suggested that
the use of loop diuretics may increase mortality in patientswith critical illness and AKI,
181along with conﬂicting data
that suggest no harm in AKI.182Finally, furosemide therapy
was also ineffective and possibly harmful when used to treat
AKI.188,192
There is no evidence that the use of diuretics reduces the
incidence or severity of AKI. Ho et al.192,193conducted two
comprehensive systematic reviews on the use of the loop
diuretic frusemide (furosemide) to prevent or treat AKI.Furosemide had no signiﬁcant effect on in-hospital mortality,risk for requiring RRT, number of dialysis sessions, or eventhe proportion of patients with persistent oliguria. Results
from the most recent review
193are shown in Figure 9 and
Figure 10. The primary prevention studies included patients
who underwent cardiac surgery,189coronary angiography,191
and major general or vascular surgery.194In two of these
studies, all participants had mild pre-existing renal impair-ment. Two of the three studies reported mortality in patientsrandomized to furosemide (n ¼103) vs. placebo (n ¼99),
with a pooled RR of 2.67 (95% CI 0.75–7.25; P¼0.15). All
three studies reported RRT incidence in patients randomizedto furosemide (n ¼128) vs. placebo (n ¼127), with a pooled
RR of 4.08 (95% CI 0.46–35.96; P¼0.21). Thus, subanalysis
to separate primary and secondary prevention trials did notalter the conclusion that, within the sample size limitationsof this study, furosemide is not effective for the preventionof AKI.
The systematic review and meta-analysis by Ho and
Power
193also included six studies that used furosemide to
treat AKI, with doses ranging from 600 to 3400 mg/d(Figure 9 and Figure 10).
192No signiﬁcant reduction was
found for in-hospital mortality or for RRT requirement. Thelargest single study of furosemide for treating AKI wasconducted by Cantarovich et al .,
188which included 338
patients with AKI requiring dialysis. Patients were randomlyassigned to the administration of either furosemide (25 mg/
kg/d i.v. or 35 mg/kg/d orally) or placebo. Although time to
reach 2 l/d of diuresis was shorter with furosemide (5.7 days)than placebo (7.8 days, P¼0.004), there was no difference in
survival and number of dialysis sessions. At present, thecurrent evidence does not suggest that furosemide can reducemortality in patients with AKI.
Furosemide may, however, be useful in achieving ﬂuid
balance to facilitate mechanical ventilation according to thehttp://www.kidney-international.org chapter 3.4
&2012 KDIGO
Kidney International Supplements (2012) 2, 37–68 47
lung-protective ventilation strategy in hemodynamically
stable patients with acute lung injury. On the other hand,the literature also suggests that high-dose furosemide(41 g/d) may cause ototoxicity. In the ﬁrst meta-analysis
by Ho and Sheridan,
192high doses of furosemide (range
1– 3.4 g/d) caused deafness or tinnitus more frequently thanthe control (RR 3.97; 95% CI 1.00–15.78; P¼0.05). When
administered as continuous infusion a dose of 0.5 mg/kg/hour was not associated with ototoxicity.
195Taken together
with several small studies showing that the prophylactic useof diuretics to prevent AKI actually increased AKI incidence,these data raise signiﬁcant concerns regarding use of loop
diuretics to prevent or treat AKI in any setting. We similarlyconclude that there is no evidence that the use of loop
diuretics reduces the severity of AKI, or improves outcomesin this syndrome. Although the use of loop diuretics in earlyor established AKI facilitates management of ﬂuid balance,
hyperkalemia, and hypercalcemia, and is indicated for these
clinical purposes, any putative role in the prevention oramelioration of AKI course is unproven.
Two recent studies have investigated whether the admin-
istration of furosemide to patients treated with CVVH couldbe associated with a more rapid discontinuation of thedialysis therapy. van der Voort et al., observed, as expected,
an increased urinary volume and sodium excretion, but this
intervention did not lead to a shorter duration of renal failure
Figure 9 |Effect of furosemide vs. control on all-cause mortality. Reprinted from Ho KM, Power BM. Benefits and risks of furosemide in
acute kidney injury. Anaesthesia 2010; 65: 283– 293 with permission from John Wiley and Sons193; accessed http://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/
doi/10.1111/j.1365-2044.2009.06228.x/full
Figure 10 |Effect of furosemide vs. control on need for RRT. Reprinted from Ho KM, Power BM. Benefits and risks of furosemide in acute
kidney injury. Anaesthesia 2010; 65: 283– 293 with permission from John Wiley and Sons193; accessed http://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/
10.1111/j.1365-2044.2009.06228.x/full
48 Kidney International Supplements (2012) 2, 37–68chapter 3.4
or more frequent renal recovery.195The second study by
Uchino et al.,196analyzed data from the B.E.S.T. kidney and
found that, from a total of 529 critically ill patients who
survived during CRRT, 313 patients were removed success-fully from CRRT while 216 patients needed ‘‘repeat RRT’’after temporary discontinuation. Urine output (during the 24hours before stopping CRRT) was identiﬁed as a signiﬁcantpredictor of successful cessation, but the predictive ability of
urine output was negatively affected by the use of diuretics.
Thus, a beneﬁcial role for loop diuretics in facilitatingdiscontinuation of RRT in AKI is not evident.
Mannitol
Mannitol has been frequently used in the past for preventionof AKI; however, most of the studies are retrospective,underpowered, and, overall, the studies did not meet thecriteria of the Work Group to be included in formulation ofrecommendations. Prophylactic mannitol has been promotedin patients undergoing surgery. While in most of these
instances mannitol increases urine ﬂow, it is highly probable
that mannitol does not convey additional beneﬁcial effectsbeyond adequate hydration on the incidence of AKI.
In radiocontrast-induced nephropathy, loop diuretics
and mannitol in one study have been shown to exacerbateARF.
191Weisberg et al .,197randomized patients under-
going contrast-medium investigations to receive saline orone of three renal vasodilator/diuretic drugs (dopamine
[2mg/kg/min], mannitol [15 g/dl in a one-half isotonic saline
solution given at 100 ml/h] or atrial natriuretic peptide).
Dopamine, mannitol, and atrial natriuretic peptide wereassociated with a much higher incidence of renal dysfunctionin diabetic subjects compared to patients receiving saline alone.
Mannitol is often added to the priming ﬂuid of the
cardiopulmonary bypass system to reduce the incidence ofrenal dysfunction, but the results of these studies are not veryconvincing.
198Two small randomized trials—one in patients
with pre-existing normal renal function,199the second in
patients with established renal dysfunction200—did not ﬁnd
differences for any measured variable of renal function.More convincing are the results obtained with the preventiveadministration of mannitol, just before clamp release, duringrenal transplantation.
201,202The sparse controlled data
available have shown that 250 ml of mannitol 20% givenimmediately before vessel clamp removal reduces the inci-dence of post-transplant AKI, as indicated by a lower require-ment of post-transplant dialysis. However, 3 months aftertransplantation, no difference is found in kidney functioncompared to patients who did not receive mannitol.
203
It has also been suggested that mannitol is beneﬁcial in
rhabdomyolysis by stimulating osmotic diuresis and by
lowering the intracompartmental pressure in the affected
crushed limbs204–206; again, these studies were either not
randomized or underpowered. A separate guideline on crushinjury associated with disasters, mainly earthquake victims, isunder preparation by the ISN Renal Disaster Relief TaskForce.
In summary, despite experimental animal data and the
anecdotal human evidence for the beneﬁcial effects of
mannitol, there are no adequately powered prospective RCTs
comparing mannitol vs. other strategies. Based on theseconsiderations, the Work Group concludes that mannitol isnot scientiﬁcally justiﬁed in the prevention of AKI.
RESEARCH RECOMMENDATION
KGiven the potential to mitigate fluid overload but also toworsen renal function and possibly cause kidney injury,further study is required to clarify the safety of loopdiuretics in the management of patients with AKI.
Kidney International Supplements (2012) 2, 37–68 49chapter 3.4
Chapter 3.5: Vasodilator therapy: dopamine,
fenoldopam, and natriuretic peptides
DOPAMINE FOR THE PREVENTION OR TREATMENT OF AKI
Dopamine was once commonly used for renal protection in
the critically ill. However, with multiple negative studies,
including a randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled
trial of adequate size and power,207its use has been
abandoned by most. Low-dose dopamine administration(1– 3mg/kg/min) to healthy individuals causes renal vasodila-
tion, natriuresis, and increased GFR; because of these effects,it has been given as prophylaxis for AKI associated withradiocontrast administration, repair of aortic aneurysms,orthotopic liver transplantation, unilateral nephrectomy,
renal transplantation, and chemotherapy with interferon.
208
The majority of prevention trials with low-dose dopamine
have been small, inadequately randomized, of limitedstatistical power, and with end-points of questionable clinicalsigniﬁcance. Furthermore, recent data suggest that the renalvasodilatory effect of dopamine found in healthy populationsis not preserved in patients with AKI. Using Dopplerultrasound, Lauschke et al .
209found that dopamine signi-
ﬁcantly increased renal vascular resistance in AKI patients.Kellum and Decker
210found no beneﬁt of dopamine for
prevention or therapy of AKI in an adequately-poweredmeta-analysis, and Marik
211found no beneﬁt in a systematic
review.
There is also limited evidence that the use of dopamine to
prevent or treat AKI causes harm. Although the meta-analysisby Friedrich et al.,
212found no signiﬁcant increase in adverse
events or evidence of harm from low-dose dopamine, there issigniﬁcant literature demonstrating adverse effects of dopa-mine, even at low doses. It can trigger tachyarrhythmiasand myocardial ischemia, decrease intestinal blood ﬂow,cause hypopituitarism, and suppress T-cell function.
208Taken
together with the lack of positive trials to support the use ofdopamine for AKI prevention or therapy, the aforementionedpotential deleterious effects of this drug provide additional
arguments for abandoning its use entirely for the prevention
and therapy of AKI.
3.5.1: We recommend not using low-dose dopamine to
prevent or treat AKI. ( 1A)
RATIONALE
In their meta-analysis, Friedrich et al.,212did not speciﬁcally
separate prophylactic trials from trials where dopamine was
used therapeutically in patients with established AKI, becausemany of the original trials failed to do so.
210The authorsanalyzed 61 randomized or quasi-randomized controlledtrials of low-dose dopamine, and found no improvement ofsurvival (Figure 11), no decrease in dialysis requirement(Figure 12), no improvement in renal function, andimproved urine output only on the ﬁrst day of dopaminetherapy.
212Similarly, although there were trends towards
transiently greater urine output, lower SCr, and higher GFRin dopamine-treated patients on day 1 of therapy (but not
days 2 and 3), there was no evidence of a sustained beneﬁcial
effect on renal function. In an earlier systematic review,Kellum et al .,
210performed an analysis of studies that
reported incidence of AKI as an outcome, which developed in15.3% in the dopamine arms and 19.5% in the control arms(RR 0.79 [0.54–1.13]). Similar to the earlier analysis byKellum et al ., restriction of the Work Group’s analysis to
prevention trials did not disclose any beneﬁt of dopamine vs.
placebo therapy. Similarly, analysis of adequate trials
restricted to patients treated for AKI does not suggest abeneﬁt of dopamine therapy. Speciﬁcally, a relatively largerandomized, placebo-controlled trial in 328 critically illpatients with early AKI sufﬁciently powered to detect a smallbeneﬁt was reported.
207There was no effect of low-dose
dopamine on renal function, need for dialysis, ICU orhospital length of stay (LOS), or mortality (Suppl Table 4).
Taken together, these analyses found no evidence that
dopamine therapy is effective in the prevention or treatmentof AKI.
FENOLDOPAM FOR THE PREVENTION OR TREATMENT OF AKI
Fenoldopam mesylate is a pure dopamine type-1 receptoragonist that has similar hemodynamic renal effects aslow-dose dopamine, without systemic a-o r b-adrenergic
stimulation.
213
3.5.2: We suggest not using fenoldopam to prevent or
treat AKI. ( 2C)
RATIONALE
The results of animal experiments and small human studiesmeasuring perioperative GFR in patients undergoing coro-nary artery bypass graft and aortic cross-clamp surgerysuggested that fenoldopam might prevent or ameliorate thecourse of AKI.
139Cogliati et al.,214conducted a double-blind,
randomized trial of fenoldopam infusion for renal protec-tion in 193 high-risk cardiac surgery patients, who wererandomized to receive a continuous infusion of fenoldopam,http://www.kidney-international.org chapter 3.5
&2012 KDIGO
50 Kidney International Supplements (2012) 2, 37–68
0.1mg/kg/min (95 patients) or placebo (98 patients) for
24 hours. AKI was deﬁned as a postoperative SCr level of
X2 mg/dl ( X177 mmol/l) with an increase in SCr level of
X0.7 mg/dl ( X61.9 mmol/l) from preoperative to maximum
postoperative values. AKI developed in 12 of 95 (12.6%)patients receiving fenoldopam and in 27 of 98 (27.6%)patients receiving placebo ( P¼0.02), and RRT was started in
0 of 95 and 8 of 98 (8.2%) patients, respectively ( P¼0.004).
These results suggested that a 24-hour infusion of
0.1mg/kg/min of fenoldopam prevented AKI in a high-risk
population undergoing cardiac surgery. A meta-analysis of
1059 patients in 13 studies that included this trial found thatfenoldopam reduces the need for RRT and in-hospital deathin cardiovascular surgery patients.
215However, the pooled
studies included both prophylactic and early therapeuticstudies, as well as propensity-adjusted case-matched studies(rather than purely randomized trials). A 1000-patient RCT
of fenoldopam to prevent the need for RRT after cardiac
surgery is currently underway (ClinicalTrials.gov identiﬁer:NCT00621790); meanwhile, this remains an unprovenindication for fenoldopam therapy.
Finally, Morelli et al .,
216in a prospective, double-blind
trial, randomized 300 septic patients without renal dysfunc-tion to receive infusions of fenoldopam (0.09 mg/kg/min)
and compared these individuals to a placebo group; the
treatment continued as long as the patient was in the ICU.The fenoldopam group had a signiﬁcantly lower rate of AKI(29 vs. 51 patients, P¼0.006; OR of 0.47, P¼0.005), and
shorter ICU stays, without any increase in complications. The
incidence of severe AKI, dialysis, and death were not differentbetween the groups. This study requires a larger conﬁrmatorytrial, which should be powered to test effectiveness inimproving dialysis-free survival.
Emerging data from experimental AKI models suggest
that fenoldopam may have multiple protective effects in AKI,
including anti-inﬂammatory effects independent of any vaso-
dilatory action.
217,218Further large studies will be required
to determine if fenoldopam is an effective renoprotec-tive agent.
213,219As discussed elsewhere in this guideline
(Section 4), despite promising pilot study ﬁndings, fenoldo-pam was ultimately found to be ineffective for the preventionof CI-AKI,
220and as a potent antihypertensive (the only
approved indication for the drug), fenoldapam carries a
signiﬁcant risk of hypotension.
Fenoldopam mesylate has also been studied for early
treatment of AKI. Tumlin et al.,221conducted a randomized,
placebo-controlled pilot trial of low-dose fenoldopam
mesylate in ICU patients with early AKI and found nobeneﬁt, though they did show a trend towards lower 21-daymortality and decreased need for dialysis in fenoldopam-treated patients (11% difference in dialysis-free survival).
In secondary analyses, fenoldopam tended to reduce the
Figure 11 |Effect of low-dose dopamine on mortality. Reprinted from Friedrich JO, Adhikari N, Herridge MS et al . Meta-analysis: low-dose
dopamine increases urine output but does not prevent renal dysfunction or death. Ann Intern Med 2005; 142: 510– 524 with permission
from American College of Physicians212; accessed http://www.annals.org/content/142/7/510.full
Kidney International Supplements (2012) 2, 37–68 51chapter 3.5
primary end-point in patients without diabetes and post-
operative cardiothoracic surgery patients with early ATN.
Brienza et al .,222conducted a prospective, multicenter,
RCT of fenoldopam therapy for early AKI in critically illpatients. The study included hemodynamically stable adults
with renal dysfunction. This 100- subject study compared 4-
day infusions of fenoldopam (0.1 mg/kg/min) or dopamine
(2mg/kg/min); there was no placebo arm. The primary end-
point of the study was a between-group comparison of themaximum change of SCr over time during the 4-day studyperiod. The peak SCr values and maximum incrementsduring the study did not differ between the fenoldopam anddopamine groups; however, in the fenoldopam group at the
end of infusion, SCr had decreased by 0.29 ±0.77 mg/dl
(25.6±68.1mmol/l), a value signiﬁcantly different from the
dopamine group (0.09 ±0.94 mg/dl [7.96 ±83.1mmol/l];
P¼0.05). Also, the maximum decreases of SCr levels from
study entry were signiﬁcantly larger in the fenoldopam
group. There was no difference in heart rate, blood pressure,incidence of hypotension, or urinary output (apart from atransiently higher value within the ﬁrst study day in the
dopamine group). The authors concluded that, for critically
ill patients with impaired renal function, a continuousinfusion of fenoldopam 0.1 mg/kg/min improves renal func-
tion when compared to renal-dose dopamine, withoutsigniﬁcant adverse effects. The study has, however, a numberof deﬁciencies, including the lack of a true control,unblinding of the investigators, and an unorthodox AKIdeﬁnition, among other limitations, but taken together withother positive trends in the literature, these results add to thediscourse around fenoldopam’s use to treat early AKI incritically ill patients. Similarly, Landoni et al.,
223in a recently
published meta-analysis found that fenoldopam decreasedthe risk of requiring acute RRT and resulted in a lower all-
cause, in-hospital mortality (15.1%) compared to controls
(18.9%; OR 0.64; 95% CI 0.4–0.91), along with a non-signiﬁcant trend towards more hypotension or pressor use inthe fenoldopam group.
Our analysis revealed three suitable prophylactic studies of
adequate size and study design (Suppl Tables 5 and 6) thatreported AKI incidence in patients randomized to fenoldo-pam (n ¼1790) vs. placebo (n ¼1839). The pooled RR and
95% CI was 0.96 (0.76–1.2), P¼NS. Only one study reported
mortality (8-day) in sepsis patients randomized to fenoldo-pam (35%, n ¼150) vs. placebo (44%, n ¼150), with a RR of
0.79 (95% CI 0.59–1.05; P¼0.1).
In our analysis of the two suitable studies of fenoldopam
therapy for AKI, only one study
221reported (21-day)
mortality in critically ill patients with early AKI randomizedto fenoldopam (11/80; 13.8%) vs. placebo (n ¼19/75, 25.3%;
P¼0.068) (Suppl Tables 7 and 8). The other study
222
reported the change in renal function in AKI patientsrandomized to fenoldopam (n ¼50) vs. dopamine (n ¼50),
deﬁned by the absolute SCr change between the beginningand end of the study drug infusion and maximum decreasefrom study entry, which were signiﬁcantly larger in thefenoldopam group with a pooled RR of 0.96 (95% CI0.76–1.2; P¼NS). These two studies reported new RRT
Figure 12 |Effect of low-dose dopamine on need for RRT. Reprinted from Friedrich JO, Adhikari N, Herridge MS et al . Meta-analysis:
low-dose dopamine increases urine output but does not prevent renal dysfunction or death. Ann Intern Med 2005; 142: 510– 524
with permission from American College of Physicians212; accessed http://www.annals.org/content/142/7/510.full
52 Kidney International Supplements (2012) 2, 37–68chapter 3.5
incidence in patients with AKI randomized to fenoldopam
(n¼130) vs. placebo (n ¼125). In the study by Tumlin et al.,
no difference in requirement of RRT was found (withfenoldopam, 13 of 80 patients; 16.25%); with placebo (19 of75 patients; 25.3%; P¼0.163). Requirement of RRT was very
rare in the study of Brienza et al., and was prescribed in a
total of only ﬁve patients; three in the dopamine group andtwo in fenoldopam group ( P¼NS). Overall, no data from
adequately powered multicenter trials with clinically sig-niﬁcant end-points and adequate safety are available torecommend fenoldopam to either prevent or treat AKI. Theguideline recommendation against using fenoldopam places ahigh value on avoiding potential hypotension and harmassociated with the use of this vasodilator in high-riskperioperative and ICU patients, and a low value on potentialbeneﬁt, which is currently only suggested by relatively low-
quality single-center trials.
RESEARCH RECOMMENDATION
KWhile randomized trials of fenoldopam to treat AKI in avariety of settings (critical illness, high-risk surgery—
particular cardiac, sepsis) may be considered, thepharmacologic strategy of renal vasodilatation has notbeen successful to date and different approaches are likelyneeded.
NATRIURETIC PEPTIDES FOR THE PREVENTION OR
TREATMENT OF AKI
Several natriuretic peptides are in clinical use or in
development for treatment of congestive heart failure(CHF) or renal dysfunction, and could potentially be useful
to prevent or treat AKI.
Atrial natriuretic peptide (ANP) is a 28-amino-acid pep-
tide with diuretic, natriuretic, and vasodilatory activity.
224
ANP is mainly produced in atrial myocytes, and the rate of
release from the atrium increases in response to atrialstretch.
225Early animal studies showed that ANP decreases
preglomerular vascular resistance and increases postglomer-ular vascular resistance, leading to increased GFR.
226It also
inhibits renal tubular sodium reabsorption. Increases in GFRand diuresis have also been conﬁrmed in clinical studies.
227It
could thus be expected that ANP might be useful fortreatment of AKI, and several RCTs have been conducted totest this hypothesis.
3.5.3: We suggest not using atrial natriuretic peptide
(ANP) to prevent ( 2C) or treat ( 2B) AKI.
RATIONALE
There have been several negative studies of prophylactic ANP
therapy; for example, ANP failed in two studies to preventprimary renal transplant dysfunction
228,229and ANP pro-
phylaxis also failed to prevent CI-AKI.230Based on the
positive results of small clinical studies using ANP to treatAKI, a randomized placebo-controlled trial in 504 criticallyill patients with AKI was conducted.
231Patients received 24-
hour i.v. infusion of either ANP (0.2 mg/kg/min) or placebo.
The primary outcome was dialysis-free survival for 21 daysafter treatment. Despite the large size of the trial, ANPadministration had no effect on 21-day dialysis-free survival,mortality, or change in plasma creatinine concentration. Ofnote, the mean SCr at enrollment (anaritide group: 4.4 mg/dl[389mmol/l]; placebo group: 5.0 mg/dl [442 mmol/l]) in this
study conﬁrms that intervention in this trial was extremelylate in the course of AKI. In subgroup analysis, dialysis-freesurvival was higher in the treatment group for patients witholiguria (o400 ml/d; ANP 27%, placebo 7%, P¼0.008). A
subsequent trial in 222 patients with oliguric renal failure,however, failed to demonstrate any beneﬁt of ANP.
232The
dose and duration of ANP treatment and primary outcomewere the same as the previous study. The dose of ANP might
have been too high (0.2 mg/kg/min) in both studies:
hypotension (systolic blood pressure o90 mm Hg) occurred
more frequently in the ANP groups of both trials (in the ﬁrst
study, 46% vs. 18%, Po0.001; and in the second study, 97%
vs. 58%, Po0.001), and this may have negated any potential
beneﬁt of renal vasodilation in these patients. In addition toan excessive dose, the failure of these large studies has alsobeen attributed in subsequent analyses to the late initiation of
the drug to patients with severe AKI and an inadequate
duration of infusion (only 24 hours).
A promising, but underpowered, study of ANP to treat
AKI immediately following cardiac surgery showed adecreased rate of postoperative RRT compared to placebo-treated patients.
233In this study, Sward et al. randomized 61
patients with AKI following cardiac surgery (deﬁned as a SCrincreaseX50% from a baseline o1.8 mg/dl [ o159 mmol/l])
to receive infusion of ANP or placebo until the SCr decreasedbelow the baseline value at enrollment, the patient died, orone of four prespeciﬁed dialysis criteria was reached. Of note,all patients received infusions of furosemide (20–40 mg/h)and oliguria, deﬁned as a urine output p0.5 ml/kg/h for 3
hours, was an exclusion criterion and an automatic dialysisindication. The primary end-point was the rate of dialysiswithin 21 days of enrollment. CrCl was signiﬁcantly higher
on the third study day in ANP-treated subjects ( P¼0.04).
Using prespeciﬁed dialysis criteria, 21% of patients in the
ANP group and 47% in the placebo group were dialyzedwithin 21 days (hazard ratio [HR] 0.28; 95% CI 0.10–0.73;P¼0.009). The combined secondary end-point of death-or-
dialysis was similarly improved in the ANP group (28%)compared to placebo (57%; HR 0.35; 95% CI 0.14–0.82;P¼0.017). The incidence of hypotension during the ﬁrst 24
hours was 59% in the ANP group and 52% in controls(P¼NS).
It is intriguing to speculate on the potential reasons for the
positive outcome of this trial, compared to larger priorstudies of ANP for AKI prevention and therapy. Apart fromthe possibility that this is a false-positive, underpoweredstudy, possible explanations include the use of ANP earlier inthe course of AKI (the mean SCr in the prior ANP studies
Kidney International Supplements (2012) 2, 37–68 53chapter 3.5
was much higher), and at lower doses (50 ng/kg/min vs.
200 ng/kg/min) that avoided the signiﬁcant rate of hypoten-sion observed in prior trials. The use of prespeciﬁed dialysiscriteria was another strength of this trial. More recently,Sward et al .,
234compared the renal hemodynamic effects
of ANP and furosemide in 19 mechanically ventilatedpost–cardiac surgery patients with normal renal function,measuring renal blood ﬂow, GFR, and renal oxygen
extraction. ANP infusion (25–50 ng/kg/min) increased GFR,
ﬁltration fraction, fractional excretion of sodium, and urineoutput, accompanied by a 9% increase in tubular sodiumabsorption and a 26% increase in renal oxygen consumption.Furosemide infusion (0.5 mg/kg/h) increased urine output10-fold and fractional excretion of sodium 15-fold, whiledecreasing tubular sodium absorption by 28% and loweringrenal oxygen consumption by 23%. Furosemide also lowered
GFR by 12% and ﬁltration fraction by 7%. Thus, although
the balance of renal hemodynamic and tubular effects of thetwo drugs appears to favor furosemide for improving renaloxygen delivery-consumption balance, ANP is more likely toacutely improve GFR. One might speculate that the use offurosemide infusion in all of the subjects in the successfulANP trial may have provided an important protectionagainst renal ischemia by reducing tubular sodium absorp-
tion and associated oxygen consumption, despite an increase
in GFR in the ANP group. A larger prospective trial of ANPto improve dialysis-free survival in this setting is required,perhaps with and without furosemide infusion.
Pooled analysis of 11 studies involving 818 participants in
the prevention cohort showed a trend toward reduction inthe need for RRT in the ANP group (OR 0.45; 95% CI0.21–0.99; P¼0.05). Restricting the analysis to studies that
used low-dose ANP preparations did not change the overalleffect for this outcome. There was no signiﬁcant differencenoted between the ANP and control groups for mortality inthe prevention category (OR 0.67; 95% CI 0.19–2.35;P¼0.53), and this effect was unchanged by restricting the
analysis to studies that used low-dose ANP preparations.However, these studies were generally of poor quality, severalwithout reported baseline SCr values or clear deﬁnitions of
AKI or RRT indications (Suppl Tables 10 and 11), and only
one was of adequate quality.
Nigwekar et al ., recently conducted a systematic review
and meta-analysis of ANP for management of AKI.
235They
found 19 relevant studies, among which 11 studies were forprevention and eight were for treatment of AKI. Pooledanalysis of the eight treatment studies, involving 1043participants, did not show signiﬁcant difference for RRT
requirement between the ANP and control groups (OR 0.59;
95% CI 0.32–1.08; P¼0.12). There was also no signiﬁcant
difference for mortality (OR 1.01; 95% CI 0.72–1.43;P¼0.89). However, low-dose ANP preparations were
associated with signiﬁcant reduction in RRT requirement(OR 0.34; 95% CI 0.12–0.96; P¼0.04). The incidence of
hypotension was not different between the ANP and controlgroups for low-dose studies (OR 1.55; 95% CI 0.84–2.87),whereas it was signiﬁcantly higher in the ANP group in thehigh-dose ANP studies (OR 4.13; 95% CI 1.38–12.41).Finally, a pooled analysis of studies that examined oliguricAKI did not show any signiﬁcant beneﬁt from ANP for RRTrequirement (OR 0.46; 95% CI 0.19–1.12; P¼0.09) or
mortality (OR 0.94; 95% CI 0.62–1.43; P¼0.79). Only two
of the treatment studies included in the Nigwekar analy-sis
231,232were of adequate size and quality to meet the criteria
for our systematic review (Suppl Tables 12 and 13), whichfound no signiﬁcant inconsistencies in the ﬁndings of bothtrials that (combined) included 720 subjects (351 treatedwith ANP) (Suppl Table 12). Thus, although subset analysesseparating low-dose from high-dose ANP trials suggestpotential beneﬁts, the preponderance of the literaturesuggests no beneﬁt of ANP therapy for AKI. Therefore, theWork Group suggests that these agents not be used to prevent
or treat AKI. This conclusion is based on placing a high value
on avoiding potential hypotension and harm associated withthe use of a vasodilator in high-risk perioperative and ICUpatients, and a low value on potential beneﬁt which issupported by relatively low-quality evidence from retro-spective subset analyses from negative multicenter trials.
Urodilatin is another natriuretic peptide that is produced
by renal tubular cells, and was found to have the same renal
hemodynamic effect as ANP without systemic hypotensive
effects.
236Limited data suggest that urodilatin improves the
course of established postoperative AKI.237Fifty-one patients
who received orthotopic heart transplants received urodilatin(6– 20 ng/kg/min) up to 96 hours postoperatively. AKIoccurred in 6% of these patients, compared to 20% in ahistorical control group that did not receive urodilatin.
237
However, in another small, placebo-controlled study of 24
patients who underwent orthotopic heart transplants, the
incidence of AKI was unchanged,238although duration of
hemoﬁltration (HF) was signiﬁcantly shorter and thefrequency of intermittent hemodialysis (IHD) less in thosewho received urodilatin. Taken together, these data suggestthat natriuretic peptides may have a role in the therapy ofearly AKI following cardiac surgery, but further prospectivetrials are needed to conﬁrm this potential indication.
Nesiritide (brain natriuretic peptide) is the latest natriuretic
peptide introduced for clinical use, and is approved by theFood and Drug Administration (FDA) only for the therapyof acute, decompensated CHF. Meta-analysis of outcomedata from these and some other nesiritide CHF trialshas generated some controversy.
239–241Sackner-Bernstein
et al.,239analyzed mortality data from 12 randomized trials;
in three trials that provided 30-day mortality data, they
found a trend towards an increased risk of death in nesiritide-
treated subjects. In another meta-analysis of ﬁve randomizedtrials that included 1269 subjects,
240the same investi-
gators also found that there was a relationship betweennesiritide use and worsening renal function, deﬁned asa SCr increase 40.5 mg/dl ( 444.2mmol/l). Nesiritide doses
p0.03 mg/kg/min signiﬁcantly increased the risk of renal
dysfunction compared to non– inotrope-based controls or
54 Kidney International Supplements (2012) 2, 37–68chapter 3.5
compared to all control groups (including inotropes). Even
at doses p0.015 mg/kg/min, nesiritide was associated with
increased renal dysfunction compared to controls. There wasno difference in dialysis rates between the groups. Anotherretrospective study determined independent risk factors for60-day mortality by multivariate analysis in a cohort of 682elderly heart-failure patients treated with nesiritide vs. thosewho were not.
242When patients were stratiﬁed according to
nesiritide usage, AKI emerged as an independent risk factorfor mortality only among patients who received the drug.Strikingly, among these heart-failure patients who developedAKI, nesiritide usage emerged as the only independentpredictor of mortality.
The manufacturers of nesiritide convened an expert panel,
which concluded that further trial data are needed to discernthe effects of nesiritide therapy on renal function and survival
in patients with decompensated CHF. The panel also re-
emphasized that the indication for nesiritide therapy is acutedecompensated CHF, not chronic intermittent therapy orother uses, and in particular noted that the drug should notbe used to improve renal function or in place of diuretictherapy in CHF patients, as there is no proof of the utility ofthe drug for these purposes. A 7000-patient multicenter RCTin acute decompensated heart failure is currently in progress
to determine the clinical effectiveness of nesiritide therapy for
acute decompensated heart failure (the Acute Study ofClinical Effectiveness of Nesiritide in Decompensated HeartFailure; Clinicaltrials.gov identiﬁer NCT00475852). Mean-while, nesiritide is approved for treatment of symptomaticacute decompensated heart failure.
Uncontrolled studies using nesiritide for cardiovascular
support of patients with CHF undergoing cardiac surgery
have suggested beneﬁcial effects on renal function. Mentzer
et al.,
243conducted a 303-patient, multicenter, randomized,
double-blind trial of a 24- to 96-hour infusion of 0.01 mg/kg/
min of nesiritide vs. placebo in patients with chronic leftventricular dysfunction (ejection fraction p40%) under-
going cardiac surgery using cardiopulmonary bypass. TheNesiritide Administered Peri-Anesthesia in Patients Under-going Cardiac Surgery trial was an exploratory, safety-
oriented study with ﬁve primary end-points, including three
renal end-points and two hemodynamic end-points. Therewere no signiﬁcant differences between the groups in base-line patient characteristics; SCr values were B1.1 mg/dl
(97.2mmol/l), with eGFR B80 ml/min per 1.73 m
2. The
mean duration of study drug infusion was B40 hours in
both groups. Perioperative renal function quantiﬁed by thethree renal primary end-points was better in the nesiritide
group (peak SCr increase of 0.15 mg/dl [13.3 mmol/l] vs.
placebo group 0.34 mg/dl [30.1 mmol/l]; Po0.001; eGFR
decrease of /C010.2 ml/min per 1.73 m
2vs. placebo /C017.8 ml/
min per 1.73 m2,P¼0.001; initial 24-hour urinary output
2.9±1.2 l vs. placebo 2.3 ±1l ;Po0.001). The RR of AKI in
the nesiritide group compared to placebo was 0.58
(0.27–1.21); the 180-day mortality was also reduced in thenesiritide group (RR 0.48 [0.22–1.05]; P¼0.046) (SupplTable 9). These trends were more pronounced in the small,62-patient subset with preoperative SCr values 41.2 mg/dl
(4106mmol/l). Although SCr increased postoperatively in
both groups, it returned to baseline within 12 hours in thenesiritide group, and remained elevated throughout hospi-talization in the placebo group. Use of vasoactive drugs andhemodynamic parameters did not differ signiﬁcantly betweenthe groups. Adverse events also were similar between the
groups, as was 30-day and 180-day mortality (although
capture of mortality data was incomplete). Thus, it appearsthat administration of nesiritide infusion during and aftercardiac surgery with cardiopulmonary bypass in patientswith preoperative left ventricular dysfunction has favorableshort-term effects on renal function, with short-term adverseeffects comparable to placebo infusion; however, as men-tioned earlier, this is not an FDA-approved indication for this
drug. It is interesting to speculate that, based upon these
results, any renoprotective effect of this vasoactive drugduring and after cardiopulmonary bypass is not mediated byeffects on systemic perfusion (similar in both groups), butrather suggesting an effect on regional perfusion or apleiotropic phenomenon. Unfortunately, these promisingpilot study ﬁndings have not been followed up with aconﬁrmatory prospective clinical trial.
A prospective, randomized clinical trial (the Nesiritide
Study), found no beneﬁt of nesiritide for 21-day dialysis and/or death in patients undergoing high-risk cardiovascularsurgery.
244However, the study did demonstrate that the
prophylactic use of nesiritide was associated with reducedincidence of AKI, the latter deﬁned by the AKIN Group, inthe immediate postoperative period (nesiritide 6.6% vs.placebo 28.5%, P¼0.004). Recently, Lingegowda et al .
245
investigated whether the observed renal beneﬁts of nesiritidehad any long-term impact on cumulative patient survival andrenal outcomes. Data on all 94 patients from the NesiritideStudy were obtained with a mean follow-up period of 20.8 ±
10.4 months. No differences in cumulative survival betweenthe groups were noted, but patients with in-hospitalincidence of AKI had a higher rate of mortality than thosewith no AKI (41.4% vs. 10.7%; P¼0.002). It seemed, thus,
that the possible renoprotection provided by nesiritide in theimmediate postoperative period was not associated withimproved long-term survival in patients undergoing high-risk cardiovascular surgery.
In summary, although evidence from a variety of small
studies suggests the potential for therapy with natriureticpeptides to be useful for the prevention or treatment of AKIin a variety of settings, there are no deﬁnitive trials to support
the use of ANP, BNP, or nesiritide for these purposes. Thus,
the Work Group suggests that these agents not be used forprevention or treatment of AKI.
RESEARCH RECOMMENDATION
KWe recommend further trials of ANP at doses below0.1mg/kg/min, for the prevention or treatment of AKI.
There is a possibility that ANP might be effective if it is
Kidney International Supplements (2012) 2, 37–68 55chapter 3.5
given at a lower dose (0.01–0.05 mg/kg/min) in patients
prophylactically or with early AKI, and during a longer
period than in previous large studies.
SUPPLEMENTARY MATERIAL
Supplementary Table 4: Summary table of RCTs examining the effect
of dopamine vs. placebo for the treatment of AKI.
Supplementary Table 5: Evidence profile of RCTs examining fenoldo-
pam vs. control for the prevention of AKI.Supplementary Table 6: Summary table of RCTs examining the effect
of fenoldopam for the prevention of AKI.Supplementary Table 7: Evidence profile of RCTs of fenoldopam vs.
placebo for the treatment of AKI.Supplementary Table 8: Summary table of RCTs of examining the
effect of fenoldopam for the treatment of AKI.Supplementary Table 9: Summary table of RCTs of nesiritide vs. control
for the prevention of AKI.Supplementary Table 10: Evidence profile of RCTs examining anaritide
vs. control for the prevention of AKI.Supplementary Table 11: Summary table of RCTs examining the effect
of anaritide vs. control for the prevention of AKI.Supplementary Table 12: Evidence profile of RCTs examining anaritide
vs. placebo for the treatment of AKI.Supplementary Table 13: Summary table of RCTs examining the effect
of ANP vs. placebo for the treatment of AKI.
Supplementary material is linked to the online version of the paper at
http://www.kdigo.org/clinical_practice_guidelines/AKI.php
56 Kidney International Supplements (2012) 2, 37–68chapter 3.5
Chapter 3.6: Growth factor intervention
Recovery from AKI involves increased expression of various
growth factors acting via autocrine, paracrine, and endocrinemechanisms. The advent of recombinant growth factors hasstimulated research exploring their therapeutic potential
in AKI. Experimental studies have yielded promising results
with individual growth factors
246including insulin-like
growth factor-1 (IGF-1), hepatic growth factor, and, morerecently, erythropoietin. The physiological basis for the use oferythropoietin in the prevention of AKI has recently beendescribed.
247
3.6.1: We recommend not using recombinant human
(rh)IGF-1 to prevent or treat AKI. ( 1B)
RATIONALE
IGF-1 is a peptide with renal vasodilatory, mitogenic andanabolic properties. rhIGF-1 has been demonstrated toaccelerate the recovery of renal function in several animalmodels of AKI.
248–251Three double-blind, placebo-controlled
RCTs have addressed the usefulness of IGF-1 in adultswith imminent or established AKI.
252–254Franklin et al.,252
administered rhIGF-1 every 12 hours for 3 days post-operatively to 54 patients undergoing abdominal aortic
surgery. While no patient developed ARF, a smaller propor-
tion of IGF-1– treated patients showed a decline in GFR ascompared to the placebo group (22% vs. 33%). Hladunewichet al .,
254administered rhIGF-1 or placebo in 43 patients
undergoing cadaveric renal transplantation at high risk ofdelayed graft function. Treatment was started within 5 hoursof transplantation and continued for 6 days. On day 7,neither inulin clearance, nor urine ﬂow or fractional sodium
excretion differed between the treatment arms, nor did
the nadir SCr after 6 weeks or the proportion of patientsrequire post-transplantation dialysis. Hirschberg et al .,
253
treated 72 patients suffering from AKI mainly due to sepsis orhemodynamic shock with either rhIGF-1 or placebo for amean of 10.6 days. No differences were observed with respectto changes in GFR, urine output, need for RRT, andmortality. Hence, despite its therapeutic efﬁcacy in various
animal models of ARF, rhIGF-1 largely failed to prevent
or accelerate recovery from established AKI in humans.In addition, the high cost of this treatment should bementioned.
Based on an analysis of the three RCTs with rhIGF-1 that
are currently available and which were overall negative or atleast equivocal, and considering that there is no beneﬁt andthe concern over potential harm and cost associated with thisdrug, the Work Group recommends against its use in patientswith AKI.
Erythropoietin
A small pilot trial evaluated the effectiveness of erythro-poietin in the prevention of AKI after elective coronary
artery bypass graft.
255Patients received either 300 U/kg of
erythropoietin or saline i.v. before surgery. AKI was deﬁned
as a 50% increase in SCr levels over baseline within theﬁrst ﬁve postoperative days. Of 71 patients, 13 developedpostoperative AKI: three of the 36 patients in the erythro-poietin group (8%) and 10 of the 35 patients in the placebogroup (29%; P¼0.035). The increase in postoperative SCr
concentration and the decline in postoperative eGFR were
signiﬁcantly lower in the erythropoietin group than in the
placebo group.
More recently, Endre et al .,
256performed a pros-
pective randomized trial with erythropoietin in the primaryprevention of AKI in ICU patients at risk for AKI (SupplTable 14). As a guide for choosing the patients for treatmentthe urinary levels of two biomarkers, the proximal tubularbrush border enzymes c-glutamyl transpeptidase and alkaline
phosphatase were measured. Randomization to either
placebo or two doses of erythropoietin was triggered by anincrease in the biomarker concentration product to levelsabove 46.3. The primary outcome was the relative averageSCr increase from baseline over 4– 7 days. The triggeringbiomarker concentration product selected patients withmore severe illness and at greater risk of AKI, dialysis,or death; however, the urinary marker elevations were
transient. The use of the biomarkers allowed randomization
within an average of 3.5 hours of a positive sample. Therewas no difference in the incidence of erythropoietin-speciﬁcadverse events; however, there was also no differencein the primary outcome between the placebo and treatmentgroups.
RESEARCH RECOMMENDATION
KRecent animal studies suggest a potential clinical benefitof erythropoietin in AKI. In various rodent models ofAKI, erythropoietin consistently improved functionalrecovery. The renoprotective action of erythropoietinmay be related to pleomorphic properties includingantiapoptotic and antioxidative effects, stimulation of cellhttp://www.kidney-international.org chapter 3.6
&2012 KDIGO
Kidney International Supplements (2012) 2, 37–68 57
proliferation, and stem-cell mobilization.247Although
one recent RCT in the prevention of human AKI was
negative, the usefulness of erythropoietin in human AKIshould be further tested in RCTs.SUPPLEMENTARY MATERIAL
Supplementary Table 14: Summary table of RCTs examining the effect
of erythropoietin vs. placebo for the prevention of AKI.
Supplementary material is linked to the online version of the paper at
http://www.kdigo.org/clinical_practice_guidelines/AKI.php
58 Kidney International Supplements (2012) 2, 37–68chapter 3.6
Chapter 3.7: Adenosine receptor antagonists
The activation of tubuloglomerular feedback in response to
elevated luminal chloride concentrations in the distal renaltubules is an early event in ischemic AKI. Adenosine releasedas part of the tubuloglomerular feedback loop binds toglomerular adenosine A1 receptor, causing vasoconstriction
of the afferent arteriole, decreased renal blood ﬂow and GFR,
and sodium and water retention. This well-known role ofadenosine in this phenomenon has stimulated a body ofresearch seeking to prevent or treat AKI with adenosinereceptor antagonists, primarily in three clinical syndromeswith increased risk of AKI: perinatal asphyxia, radiocontrastexposure, and cardiorenal syndrome. Theophylline is anonselective adenosine receptor antagonist.
3.7.1: We suggest that a single dose of theophylline may
be given in neonates with severe perinatal asphyxia,
who are at high risk of AKI. ( 2B)
RATIONALE
AKI occurs in 60% of neonates suffering from perinatalasphyxia.
257Experimental studies indicated an important role
of adenosine-mediated vasocons triction in neonatal kidneys
exposed to normocapnic hypoxemia.258Ap o t e n t i a lr e n o p r o t e c -
tive effect of theophylline in peri natal asphyxia has been assessed
in three randomized, placebo-controlled clinical trials,259– 261
including a total of 171 term neonates. Theophylline was
uniformly administered in the ﬁ rst hour of life as a single i.v.
bolus at a dose of 5 mg/kg259,261or 8 mg/kg.260The three studies
all observed signiﬁcantly higher GFR, higher urine output withmore negative ﬂuid balance, and lower urinary b2-microglobu-
lin excretion, with theophylline as compared to placebo duringthe ﬁrst 3– 5 days of life. In each study, theophylline treatment
was associated with a signiﬁcantly reduced risk of severe renal
dysfunction (17–25% vs. 55–60% in placebo group, RR0.3– 0.41). The beneﬁcial effect was selective for kidney function,whereas the incidence of central nervous system, cardiac,pulmonary, and gastrointestinal complications was unaltered.Patient survival was not affected by treatment. In line with thesestudies in mature neonates, a similar improvement of GFR andurine output was observed during the ﬁrst 2 days of life by
administration of 1 mg/kg theophylline vs. placebo in 50 very
preterm neonates with respiratory distress syndrome.
262The
further evolution of renal function was followed throughout theﬁrst year of life by Bhat et al.,
260who found equally normal
glomerular and tubular function in both groups from 6 weeks ofage onward. Hence, while theop hylline clearly improves renal
f u n c t i o ni nt h eﬁ r s tw e e ko fl i f ei np o s t a s p h y c t i cn e o n a t e s ,t h eoverall beneﬁt from this intervention in neonatal intensive careis less evident in view of the complete long-term recovery ofrenal function in the placebo-treated controls and the absenceof an effect on patient survival.
In recent years, the advent of selective adenosine A1
receptor antagonists has prompted the conduct of some
interesting clinical trials, which to date have focused on the
prevention and treatment of cardiorenal syndrome. In adouble-blind placebo-controlled trial of 63 patients withCHF, single doses of the adenosine A1 antagonist BG9719had a marked stimulatory effect on diuresis and increasedGFR.
263When coadministered with furosemide, BG9719
showed a synergistic diuretic effect and prevented thedecrease in GFR associated with the loop diuretic.
Rolofylline, another adenosine A1 receptor antagonist,
was tested in two double-blind placebo-controlled RCTs inpatients with acute decompensated heart failure. In the ﬁrststudy, rolofylline or placebo was administered eitherconcomitantly with furosemide for 3 days (146 patients), oras a single infusion in 35 diuretic resistant patients.
264In both
substudies, rolofylline improved urine output and CrClcompared to placebo. The second trial involved 301 patients
hospitalized for acute heart failure with renal impairment
who received either placebo or one of three doses ofrolofylline for 3 days.
265Rolofylline administration dose-
dependently attenuated the rise in SCr observed in theplacebo group within 14 days, and tended to reduce 60-daymortality or readmission for cardiovascular or renal causes.
Three pivotal phase III trials in a total of 2500 patients
were recently completed, aiming to corroborate the reno-
protective effects of rolofylline in patients with cardiorenal
syndrome, and to establish drug safety. The ﬁnal results of thePROTECT trial have recently been published.
266Rolofylline,
as compared to placebo, did not provide a beneﬁt withrespect to the three primary end-points: survival, heart-failure status, and changes in renal function. Persistent renalimpairment developed in 15.0% of patients in the rolofyllinegroup and in 13.7% of patients in the placebo group
(P¼0.44). By 60 days, death or readmission for cardiovas-
cular or renal causes had occurred in similar proportions of
patients assigned to rolofylline and placebo (30.7% and31.9%, respectively; P¼0.86). Adverse-event rates were
similar overall; however, only patients in the rolofyllinegroup had seizures, a known potential adverse effect ofA1-receptor antagonists. Thus, rolofylline does not appear tobe effective for treatment of cardiorenal AKI.
RESEARCH RECOMMENDATION
KIt appears that if there are benefits of using adeno-sine receptor antagonists to decrease tubuloglomerularhttp://www.kidney-international.org chapter 3.7
&2012 KDIGO
Kidney International Supplements (2012) 2, 37–68 59
feedback-mediated vasoconstriction and increase renal
blood flow and GFR in AKI, they may be limited to veryspecific populations (e. g., asphyctic neonates). Thesebenefits must be balanced against potential adversedrug effects: both renal (increased renal blood flow anddistal salt delivery might harmfully increase tubularoxygen consumption in the presence of ATN), andnonrenal (lower seizure threshold). Thus, further studiesare still needed to clarify the role for theophylline inneonates.
60 Kidney International Supplements (2012) 2, 37–68chapter 3.7
Chapter 3.8: Prevention of aminoglycoside- and
amphotericin-related AKI
AMINOGLYCOSIDE NEPHROTOXICITY
Aminoglycoside antimicrobial agents are highly potent,
bactericidal antibiotics effective against multiple Gram-
negative, and selected Gram-positive bacterial pathogens
when administered with beta-lactams and other cell-wallactive antimicrobial agents.
267–269Progressive antimicrobial
resistance to other antimicrobial agents and lack of newalternatives to aminoglycoside antibiotics have caused arecent increase in their use. Aminoglycosides have manyfavorable attributes, including their remarkable stability,predictable pharmacokinetics, low incidence of immuno-
logically mediated side-effects, and lack of hematologic or
hepatic toxicity. Nephrotoxicity, and to a lesser degreeototoxicity and neuromuscular blockade, continue to bethe major dose-limiting toxicities of the aminoglycosides.Careful dosing and therapeutic drug monitoring of amino-glycosides using pharmacokinetic and pharmacodynamicprinciples can mitigate the risk of AKI with these clinicallyuseful, yet nephrotoxic antibiotics.
270A number of meta-
analyses and treatment guidelines have been publishedrecently indicating that the risk of AKI attributable toaminoglycosides is sufﬁciently frequent that they should nolonger be added to other standard antimicrobial agents forthe empirical or directed treatment of a number of severeGram-positive or Gram-negative bacterial infections.
271–276
The intrinsic risk of AKI with the administration ofaminoglycosides has led some authors to call for elimination
of aminoglycosides as a therapeutic option in current clinical
management of infectious diseases.
277The anticipated demise
of aminoglycosides from our therapeutic armamentariumhas not occurred, however, in light of recent developmentswith progressive antimicrobial resistance to beta-lactams,quinolones, and a number of other classes of antimicrobialagents.
3.8.1: We suggest not using aminoglycosides for the treat-
ment of infections unless no suitable, less nephro-
toxic, therapeutic alternatives are available. ( 2A)
RATIONALE
Aminoglycosides exhibit a number of favorable pharmaco-kinetic and pharmacodynamic advantages, but a major dose-limiting toxicity of the aminoglycosides remains the riskof drug-induced AKI.
270The risk of AKI attributable to
aminoglycosides is sufﬁciently high (up to 25% in someseries, depending upon the deﬁnition of AKI used and thepopulation studied)
271–276,278that they should no longer be
used for standard empirical or directed treatment, unless noother suitable alternatives exist. The intrinsic risk of AKI withthe administration of aminoglycosides has led some authorsto recommend the elimination of aminoglycosides as aclinical treatment option.
277Certainly their use should be
restricted to treat severe infections where aminoglycosides arethe best, or only, therapeutic option.
Aminoglycosides should be used for as short a period of
time as possible. Repeated administration of aminoglycosidesover several days or weeks can result in accumulation ofaminoglycosides within the renal interstitium and withinthe tubular epithelial cells.
279This can result in a higher
incidence of nephrotoxicity with repeated exposure toaminoglycosides over time. Older patients ( 465 years),
patients with pre-existing renal dysfunction, and septic
patients with intravascular volume depletion and rapid
alterations in ﬂuid dynamics may be at greater risk foraminoglycoside nephrotoxicity. Other risk factors for ami-noglycoside-induced AKI are diabetes mellitus, concomitantuse of other nephrotoxic drugs, prolonged use, excessiveblood levels, or repeated exposure to separate courses ofaminoglycoside therapy over a short time interval.
267–279
3.8.2: We suggest that, in patients with normal kidney
function in steady state, aminoglycosides areadministered as a single dose daily rather thanmultiple-dose daily treatment regimens. ( 2B)
RATIONALE
Aminoglycoside demonstrates concentration-dependent bac-tericidal activity, with a prolonged ‘‘postantibiotic effect’’ ,thereby permitting extended interval dosing in an effort tooptimize efﬁcacy and minimize toxicity. This dosing strategyand a number of other measures to limit aminoglycosideuptake in renal tubular cells, prevent apoptosis, limit oxygeninjury, and protect mitochondrial function have all beenrecommended to minimize the risk of AKI and preserve
the therapeutic value of these important antimicrobial
agents.
280–296Single-dose daily or extended-interval dosing
of aminoglycosides offer a number of theoretical andpractical advantages to maintain antimicrobial activity whilelimiting possible nephrotoxicity. This convenient andinexpensive aminoglycoside dosing strategy has been widelyadopted at many centers when using this potentially toxic, yethighly effective, class of antibiotics.http://www.kidney-international.org chapter 3.8
&2012 KDIGO
Kidney International Supplements (2012) 2, 37–68 61
When feasible in patients with normal and stable kidney
function, once-daily (often referred to as extended-interval)
dosing of aminoglycosides should be used to limit amino-glycoside nephrotoxicity. The pharmacokinetic and pharma-codynamic properties of aminoglycosides favor high dosingstrategies with extended intervals between doses. The keytherapeutic parameter for efﬁcacy is peak blood level dividedby minimum inhibitory concentration (MIC) of the infecting
organism (C
max/MIC) in an effort to obtain 410-fold
Cmax/MIC. Aminoglycosides induce a prolonged postanti-
biotic effect (inhibition of bacterial growth after blood levels
have fallen below the MIC of the organism). The length of thepostantibiotic effect is directly related to the peak bloodlevels. These pharmacokinetic/pharmacodynamic parametersmake single-dose daily strategies an attractive option whenusing aminoglycosides.
The nephrotoxicity of aminoglycosides has been very well
studied
280–282,284–293,295,296and is primarily related to uptake
of aminoglycosides through a receptor known as megalin,expressed on epithelial cells along the proximal convolutedtubule.
293Aminoglycosides are concentrated in the proximal
convoluted tubules, where they bind avidly to polyanionic,phospholipid-containing membranes. Aminoglycosides in-duce myeloid body formation, impair protein synthesis,
degrade mitochondrial function, and culminate in apoptosis
and eventual necrosis of renal tubular epithelial cells. Directglomerular injury can occur
288but is usually a secondary
consequence of aminoglycoside-induced tubular impairment.As the receptor uptake of aminoglycosides is saturable, high-level intermittent doses of aminoglycosides actually reducedthe daily uptake and accumulation of aminoglycosides whencompared to multiple-daily dosing strategies. This should
limit the risk of nephrotoxicity, at least in principle.
The potential efﬁcacy of single-dose daily regimens (or
other extended dosing treatment programs) of aminoglyco-
sides vs. multiple-daily dosing strategies has been extensivelystudied in numerous controlled and uncontrolled clinicalstudies over many years
297–308, and the subject has been the
focus of a number of formal meta-analyses.309–314These
investigations include pediatric populations, elderly popula-
tions, empirical therapy, targeted therapy, treatment directed
towards Gram-negative bacterial pathogens and Gram-positive bacterial pathogens.
The cumulative results of this evidence-based review and
numerous meta-analyses indicate that once-daily dosingstrategies generally tend to result in less AKI when comparedto multiple-dose dosing strategies, although the beneﬁtaccrued by the single-daily dose strategy is modest and
inconsistent across a number of these studies. For this reason,
a level 2 recommendation is suggested in support of theuse of single-daily dose strategies over multiple-dose dailystrategies. It should be noted that multiple-daily dosingstrategies continue to be the standard of care for enterococcalendocarditis; no detailed, randomized trials have beenreported comparing single-daily vs. multiple-daily regimensfor enterococcal endocarditis.
272,315–317The use of single-daily dosing of aminoglycosides is
generally well-tolerated but bolus infusions of aminoglyco-sides should be avoided. The high-dose, once-daily amino-glycoside regimens should be administered over 60 minutesto avoid untoward events such as neuromuscular blockade.This recommendation is particularly important whenpatients are receiving other potential neuromuscular block-ing agents, or have underlying disorders affecting neuro-
muscular transmission (e.g., myasthenia gravis).
3.8.3: We recommend monitoring aminoglycoside drug
levels when treatment with multiple daily dosing is
used for more than 24 hours. ( 1A)
RATIONALE
Therapeutic drug monitoring has been the standard of carewhen administering aminoglycosides for many years. Amino-glycoside levels are variable among individuals, and subtlechanges in the volume distribution, renal blood ﬂow, and
ﬁltration rate can affect renal handling of aminoglycosides
and alter the risk of nephrotoxicity. For these reasons,therapeutic drug monitoring, in combination with orindependent from, single-dose daily treatment regimens isrecommended.
318–321When using therapeutic drug monitor-
ing in single-dose or extended-dose treatment strategies, theC
maxshould be at least 10-fold greater than the MIC of the
infecting microorganism. This C min(trough level) should be
undetectable by 18–24 hours to limit accumulation ofaminoglycosides in renal tubular cells and to minimize therisk of AKI. The usual dosing strategy for once-dailyaminoglycosides is 5 mg/kg/d for gentamicin and tobramycin(with normal renal function); 6 mg/kg/d for netilmicin; and15 mg/kg/d for amikacin. The multiple-dose daily regimenfor gentamicin and tobramycin is usually 1.7 mg/kg every8 hours with peak blood levels at 8 ±2mg/ml (17 ±4mmol/l)
and trough of 1–2 mg/ml (2– 4 mmol/l). Amikacin levels with
the multiple-dose daily dosing strategy should be a peakof 20±5mg/ml (34 ±9mmol/l) and a trough of 5–8 mg/ml
(9– 14mmol/l). We recommend therapeutic drug monitoring
when using prolonged courses of aminoglycosides to limitthe risk of nephrotoxicity when using multiple-daily dosing,and suggest therapeutic drug monitoring when using single-daily dosing strategies.
3.8.4: We suggest monitoring aminoglycoside drug levels
when treatment with single-daily dosing is used for
more than 48 hours. ( 2C)
RATIONALE
The timing of measurement of peak doses of aminoglycosideswith single-daily dosing strategies is not standardized andremains somewhat controversial. Some investigators do notmeasure therapeutic drug levels at all in patients receivingthis dosing strategy. Others recommend at least a single peakmeasurement to ensure that the blood levels are 10-fold
62 Kidney International Supplements (2012) 2, 37–68chapter 3.8
greater than the MIC of the infecting organism. Many
investigators recommend at least one or at least a weeklyC
minlevel obtained at either 12, 18, or 24 hours after the
aminoglycoside dose.267–270The C minlevel should be below
the limits of detection of the assay ( o1mg/ml) at these time
intervals.
Measuring aminoglycoside levels with multiple-daily
dosing strategies have been standardized for C max to be
obtained 30 minutes after a 30-minute infusion, and C min
right before the next dose for trough levels. The aminoglyco-sides should be administered in patients who are volume-replete; volume depletion increases the risk of nephrotoxicityin experimental studies and is suggested in clinical studies.Additionally, potassium repletion has been shown experi-mentally and clinically to diminish the risk of AKI related toaminoglycoside administration.
Single-dose daily regimens are difﬁcult to apply in patients
with pre-existing kidney disease, and patients with vacillatingeGFR and hemodynamics, such as critically ill patients in theICU setting. The changing pharmacokinetics and pharma-codynamics of antibiotics in general and aminoglycosides inparticular, in the critically ill patient, are such that theavoidance of single-daily dosing and application of frequenttherapeutic drug monitoring is indicated.
322
3.8.5: We suggest using topical or local applications of
aminoglycosides (e.g., respiratory aerosols, instilledantibiotic beads), rather than i.v. application, whenfeasible and suitable. ( 2B)
RATIONALE
Local instillation of aminoglycosides for a variety ofindications is gaining more widespread use in a selected setof clinical situations where aminoglycoside levels can beconcentrated at speciﬁc tissue sites. The use of aminoglyco-side-loaded beads for the prevention and treatment of boneand joint infections have become commonplace as a strategyto limit nephrotoxicity, while providing antimicrobialactivity of aminoglycosides at the tissue level.
323Local
concentrations of aminoglycoside are achieved for prolongedperiods when administered by this route. Aminoglycosideaerosol delivery systems are now in use to provide highintrapulmonary antibiotic levels with minimal systemic andkidney concentrations of the antibiotic. This strategy hasbeen used successfully in cystic ﬁbrosis patients for themanagement of difﬁcult-to-treat Gram-negative bacillarypneumonia.
324,325However, signiﬁcant nephrotoxicity with
the use of inhaled tobramycin has been described in at leasttwo cases.
326,327
RESEARCH RECOMMENDATIONS
KNo standard method exists for therapeutic drug moni-toring of aminoglycosides by single daily dosing. Uniformguidance, based upon carefully performed pharmaco-kinetic/pharmacodynamic studies on the optimal timingand method of therapeutic drug monitoring with single-daily dosing regimens, would be of great assistance.
319
KIt is generally recommended that patients receivingextended-dosing interval aminoglycosides should haveaminoglycosides administered at even greater dosingintervals if mild or moderate degrees of underlying renalimpairment exist. Optimal therapeutic monitoring inthe setting of infrequent dosing intervals for patients
with underlying CKD needs to be standardized and
uniform recommendations need to be provided bycareful pharmacokinetic/pharmacodynamic observa-tional studies.
KThe impact of IHD and high-flux CRRT upon the efficacyand toxicity of extended-duration dosing of aminoglyco-sides needs further study. As membranes with greatersieving coefficients come into greater use, the impact on
aminoglycoside elimination needs to be carefully con-
sidered. This could be investigated by RCTs usingstandard dosing intervals vs. individualized dosing regi-mens, with frequent drug-level monitoring and the useof efficacy measures and kidney injury markers asoutcomes.
KThe interaction between aminoglycosides and other anti-microbial agents, and other therapeutic agents with
nephrotoxic potential needs to be more carefully
quantified. The degree of aminoglycoside-inducednephrotoxicity alone vs. combination effects with suchdrugs as vancomycin, amphotericin B, cephalosporins,extended-spectrum penicillins, colistin, loop diuretics,clindamycin, cisplatin, and nonsteroidal anti-inflamma-tory agents needs to be more carefully examined inobservational studies.
AMPHOTERICIN B NEPHROTOXICITY
Amphotericin B has been the standard of treatment for life-threatening systemic mycoses for over 50 years. This polyeneantifungal agent is insoluble in water and needs to besolubilized with deoxycholate and given i.v. in the absence ofelectrolyte solutions to maintain solubility. Despite itsbroad-spectrum fungicidal activity against a large number
of invasive systemic mycoses, drug-induced nephrotoxicity is
common and remains the principal dose-limiting toxicity ofamphotericin B.
328–330Amphotericin B has numerous other
signiﬁcant toxicities, including thrombophlebitis, electrolytedisturbances, hypoplastic anemia, and systemic toxicityassociated with fever, chills, hypotension, and cytokinerelease.
331,332AKI related to amphotericin B is clinically
signiﬁcant and is associated with higher mortality rates,
increased LOS, and increased total costs of health care when
managing patients with systemic fungal infection.328,330
Over the past two decades, three major advances in
antifungal therapy have become clinically available: i) thelipid formulations of amphotericin B; ii) the introduction ofthe echinocandin class of antifungal agents; and iii) anexpanding number of azoles with extended activity againsta variety of fungal pathogens. Therapeutic alternatives to
Kidney International Supplements (2012) 2, 37–68 63chapter 3.8
amphotericin B have been a welcome addition in the
management of systemic mycoses and selected, protozoan,parasitic infections, but their incremental costs and tradeoffsin spectrum of activity against fungal pathogens need to beconsidered, in addition to their favorable toxicity proﬁles andreduced potential for nephrotoxicity. A number of therapeu-tic options are now available to the clinician when decidingupon the choice for empiric or directed antifungal therapy.
Avoidance of risk of nephrotoxicity is one of the major, but
not the only, determinants when selecting antifungal therapyat present.
3.8.6: We suggest using lipid formulations of ampho-
tericin B rather than conventional formulations of
amphotericin B. (2A)
RATIONALE
The broad-spectrum, polyene, antifungal agent amphotericinB deoxycholate has been the mainstay of treatment forsystemic mycoses for decades. Despite its well-known toxicityproﬁle, the potent antifungal activity of amphotericin B, inaddition to its activity against certain protozoan parasites(Plasmodium spp., Leishmania spp., Naegleria spp.), indicates
that this therapy will remain a standard agent in clinicalmedicine for the foreseeable future.
Amphotericin B– induced nephrotoxicity is related to
multiple mechanisms, including ischemic injury and directtubular- and glomerular-cell membrane toxicity. Amphoter-icin causes vasoconstriction of the afferent renal arteriolealong with a systemic inﬂammatory response that mayreduce renal blood ﬂow. Amphotericin B also directly inserts
into human cellular membranes, where it disrupts membrane
permeability and physiology.
331,332Tubular epithelial cells
residing in the deep medullary regions of the kidney areparticularly susceptible to injury where considerable osmoticstress exists across cell membranes even under physio-logic conditions. The end result is enzymuria, loss ofrenal tubular concentrating ability, renal tubular acidosis,increasing urinary losses of potassium and magnesium, and
decreased glomerular function, resulting in azotemia and
decreased synthesis of erythropoietin. Amphotericin B–induced nephrotoxicity is often accompanied by concomitantadministration of other potentially nephrotoxic agentssuch as cyclosporine A, aminoglycosides, chemotherapeuticagents, and a number of other potentially nephrotoxicagents.
328,329,333
Considerable efforts have been undertaken to try to limit
nephrotoxicity and permit the continued use of amphotericinB deoxycholate for the management of systemic mycoses.Simple maneuvers, such as salt repletion and provision ofadequate amounts of potassium, are beneﬁcial in animalmodels in the prevention of amphotericin B nephrotoxicity.These measures have a mixed record in clinical practice, andtheir capacity to prevent AKI when treating severe fungalinfections remain unclear. The relative ease and simple logicof volume repletion and potassium supplementation duringamphotericin B therapy supports their routine use, despitethe relative lack of compelling clinical evidence to recom-mend these maneuvers.
Various dosing strategies have also been instituted in an
attempt to limit amphotericin B– induced nephrotoxicity.One strategy is to give amphotericin B as a continuousinfusion rather than a 2- to 4-hour infusion to limit
nephrotoxicity.
329,334While there is some suggestion that a
continuous infusion may limit nephrotoxicity, enthusiasm
for this strategy is tempered by the potential loss of someantifungal activity. Amphotericin B exhibits concentration-dependent antifungal activity, and continuous infusion oflow-doses of amphotericin B could result in suboptimalprotection for some patients with invasive fungal infec-tions.
334
Another common strategy is the administration of
alternate-day doses of amphotericin B, rather than dailydoses.
335,336This strategy is better tolerated and might reduce
nephrotoxicity without sacriﬁcing efﬁcacy in stable patients.However, clear evidence that this strategy reduces nephro-toxicity is not supported by large, adequately controlledclinical trials as yet.
One of the major innovations in amphotericin B therapy
over the last 15 years has been the introduction of lipidformulations of amphotericin to limit the problem ofnephrotoxicity associated with conventional amphotericin Bdeoxycholate. Three lipid formulations are available includ-ing: amphotericin B colloidal dispersion, amphotericin Blipid complex, and liposomal amphotericin B. AmphotericinB colloidal dispersion is formulated by amphotericin Bcomplexed with cholesteryl sulfate. Amphotericin B lipid
complex is composed of amphotericin B complexed with
dimyristoyl phosphatidylcholine and dimyristoyl phospha-tidylglycerol. Liposomal amphotericin consists of amphoter-icin B complexed with hydrogenated soy phosphatidyl-choline, distearoylphosphatidylcholine, and cholesterol.
337– 340
Other formulations that might further reduce the risk of AKIfrom amphotericin B include nanoparticle packaging inmicelles with polyaspartic acid.
340
The safety and efﬁcacy (in incidence of nephrotoxicity) of
lipid formulations of amphotericin have been studied innumerous experimental and clinical trials with conventionalamphotericin B deoxycholate as the comparator.
337–339,341–350
A detailed analysis of these various trials, and a number ofmeta-analyses that have analyzed this clinical question,concluded that the lipid formulations are less nephrotoxicthan amphotericin B deoxycholate.
344,346When feasible, we
recommend that lipid formulations supplant the use ofconventional amphotericin B deoxycholate to reduce the riskof nephrotoxicity.
The incremental costs associated with the lipid formula-
tions and their relative efﬁcacy for systemic mycoses remainsthe subject of considerable debate. The existing evidencewould suggest that the overall risk-beneﬁt ratio and cost-effectiveness with these lipid formulations is essentially
64 Kidney International Supplements (2012) 2, 37–68chapter 3.8
cost-neutral with amphotericin B deoxycholate.337,339
Attempts to increase the doses of lipid formulations of
amphotericin further to improve efﬁcacy have resulted inmixed results and are not recommended at present.
342,343
Lipid formulations of amphotericin are less nephrotoxic but
require different dosing strategies (three- to ﬁve-fold higherdoses than deoxycholate formulations of amphotericin B).Some of these agents continue to induce general systemic
toxicity reactions similar to those observed with the deoxy-
cholate formulation (e.g., amphotericin B colloidal dispersion).
3.8.7: In the treatment of systemic mycoses or parasitic
infections, we recommend using azole antifungal
agents and/or the echinocandins rather thanconventional amphotericin B, if equal therapeuticefﬁcacy can be assumed. ( 1A)
RATIONALE
Another approach to prevent amphotericin B nephrotoxicityis to avoid polyene antifungal agents entirely and use alte-rnative agents, such as the azoles and echinocandins.
351–355
Azole antifungal agents inhibit sterol synthesis in fungal cellmembranes by blocking the activity of the 14-demethylaseenzyme essential for ergosterol synthesis. Nephrotoxicityis an unusual event following the use of azole compounds.The echinocandins are beta-glucan inhibitors that inter-
fere with cell-wall synthesis of fungal elements, and have an
entirely different mechanism of action from that ofamphotericin B. Both the azole compounds (voriconazole,ﬂuconazole, itraconazole, and posaconazole) and the echi-nocandins (caspofungin, anidulafungin, and micafungin)compare favorably to amphotericin B with respect to theirefﬁcacy against a variety of the systemic mycoses. Bothclasses of antifungal agents have the advantage of lacking
the intrinsic nephrotoxicity associated with amphotericin B
deoxycholate. Both the azole compounds and echinocandinshave proven to be less nephrotoxic than conventionalamphotericin B deoxycholate in observational studies,historical control studies, and in small comparative trials.
355
An important consideration in using these antifungal
agents is their relative efﬁcacy with respect to the likelypathogen that is targeted for treatment. Candida krusei is
intrinsically resistant to the azoles and Candida parapsilosis is
frequently resistant to the echinocandins. AmphotericinB-resistant strains of selected Aspergillus spp. and Pseudal-
lescheria boydii are well described and require alternative
therapies.There is currently insufﬁcient evidence as to whether the
echinocandins, the azoles, or the lipid formulations ofamphotericin B differ signiﬁcantly from each other withrespect to the risk of nephrotoxicity. No adequatelycontrolled, large, randomized studies have been reported todate comparing the relative risk of nephrotoxicity amphoter-icin B lipid formulations with either azole or echinocandinantifungal agents. Such studies face the difﬁculty of recruiting
sufﬁcient numbers of patients with similar baseline risk for
drug-induced AKI, and with a balance of exposure to otherpotentially nephrotoxic agents. Until such time as thesestudies are completed, no evidence-based recommendationscan be given about the relative risk of AKI attributabledirectly to these antifungal agents.
RESEARCH RECOMMENDATIONS
KSome studies indicate that the liposomal form ofamphotericin B is less nephrotoxic than amphotericin Blipid complex or amphotericin B colloidal dispersion.
RCTs in patients with systemic mycosis, with the rate of
AKI as a primary or secondary end-point, should beconducted to answer this question.
KInnovative strategies to formulate amphotericin B inmicrovesicles, nanoparticles, or micelles should be under-taken to limit nephrotoxicity in treating fungal infections.Clinical trials should compare existing formulations tothese novel formulations, and could generate cost-effective,
yet non-nephrotoxic derivatives of amphotericin B.
KCarefully selected combinations of antifungal therapies to
enhance efficacy and shorten duration of therapy maylimit toxicity and reduce costs in the treatment of fungalinfections. Investigations need to be carried out in thelaboratory and in clinical studies to improve the care ofpatients with severe fungal infections. The costs andcomplication rates of AKI, and other toxicities of short-
course combination treatment, should be compared to
standard dosing regimens of antifungal therapy.
KMarkers of early nephrotoxicity and mechanisms to avoidnephrotoxicity with amphotericin B formulations needto be studied further in clinical investigations. Theseantifungal agents are given for prolonged periods, andshould allow ample opportunity to test the validity ofnovel biomarkers of drug-induced nephrotoxicity. A
group monitored with novel AKI biomarkers should be
compared to conventional monitoring of AKI, todetermine if one or more early biomarkers of kidneyinjury add to standard clinical care in the prevention ofdrug-induced AKI.
Kidney International Supplements (2012) 2, 37–68 65chapter 3.8
Chapter 3.9: Other methods of prevention of AKI
in the critically ill
ON-PUMP VS. OFF-PUMP CORONARY ARTERY BYPASS
SURGERY
The type of cardiac surgery is important in the discussion on
risk for kidney problems associated with this surgery.Valvular procedures or aorta surgery are associated with ahigher risk. One of the most controversial risk factors ison-pump vs. off-pump coronary artery bypass surgery.Off-pump coronary artery bypass obviously removes thebypass circuit but can be associated with greater hemo-dynamic instability secondary to ventricular compression as
the heart is manipulated to access the coronary arteries.
356
It is possible, with standard operative techniques, to perform
coronary artery bypass surgery (but not valve surgery)without using cardiopulmonary bypass. This technique isknown as ‘‘off-pump’’ coronary artery bypass surgery.
It has been hypothesized that preservation of physiologic
renal perfusion by avoidance of cardiopulmonary bypasswould partially nullify the risk of AKI in patients receiving
coronary artery bypass surgery. Potential beneﬁts that have
been posited for off-pump coronary artery bypass (comparedto on-pump procedures) are reduced mortality, reduction ofAKI risk (and in particular, acute dialysis, which is associatedwith a perioperative mortality of 42% in the Society ofThoracic Surgeons database), reduced risk of cerebraldysfunction (due to stroke and neurocognitive dysfunction,the latter sometimes referred to as ‘‘pump head’’), reduction
in ICU stay and days in hospital, and reduction in atrial
ﬁbrillation. As in other areas covered by these guidelines onlymortality, risk for RRT, and AKI risk are addressed as end-point measures. It must, however, be remembered that thepotential beneﬁts of off-pump coronary artery bypass mightbe predominantly outside these areas of focus.
3.9.1: We suggest that off-pump coronary artery bypass
graft surgery not be selected solely for the purpose
of reducing perioperative AKI or need for RRT. ( 2C)
RATIONALE
As detailed in Suppl Tables 15 and 16, which summarize
RCTs, the balance of the potential beneﬁt and harms isuncertain and the quality of the evidence is weak, that off-pump surgery is associated with better outcomes of the threeend-points used in these guidelines: incidence of AKI, needfor RRT, or mortality.
A recent good-quality RCT
357was performed in 2203
patients (only B8% of patients with SCr 41.5 mg/dl[4133mmol/l]) (Suppl Table 16). There was no signiﬁcant
difference between off-pump and on-pump coronary arterybypass graft in the rate of the 30-day composite outcome.
The rate of the 1-year composite outcome was higher for
off-pump than for on-pump coronary artery bypass graft.Follow-up angiograms in the majority of the patientsrevealed that the overall rate of graft patency was lower inthe off-pump group than in the on-pump group (82.6% vs.87.8%, Po0.01).
A comprehensive meta-analysis including RCTs, and
abstracts from the proceedings of scientiﬁc meetings through
February 2010, was recently published.
358AKI was deﬁned
by a mixture of criteria, including biochemical parameter,
urine output, and dialysis requirement. Mortality wasevaluated among the studies that reported kidney-relatedoutcomes. This analysis compared off-pump with the moretraditional on-pump technique. Off-pump coronary arterybypass graft was associated with a statistically signiﬁcant40% lower odds of postoperative AKI and a nonsigniﬁcant
33% lower odds for dialysis requirement. Within the
selected trials, off-pump coronary artery bypass graft surgerywas not associated with a signiﬁcant decrease in mortality.It is apparent from this meta-analysis that the trialswere clinically heterogeneous, particularly in regards totheir deﬁnitions of kidney outcomes, and mostly were ofpoor to fair quality (based on the Jadad score). The verylow event rates (often 0– 1 patients) make the estimates
suspect and highly imprecise. There is also a question of
publication bias. There are several large trials in progressthat are likely to generate more deﬁnitive data. In chronicdialysis patients, there are observational US Renal DataSystems data to weakly support the use of off-pumptechnique (slightly lower mortality). However, with anytechnical advance that is introduced in certain centers,institutional familiarity with the technique, operator experi-
ence, and characteristics of the population referred to
the center are likely to be important modulators of out-comes. In conclusion, based on the analysis of the RCTsand the recent meta-analysis, the Work Group foundthat there was not enough evidence to recommend off-pump coronary artery bypass for reducing AKI or the needfor RRT.
RESEARCH RECOMMENDATION
KFurther studies are needed to clarify the role of off-pumpcoronary artery bypass in patients with increased riskfor AKI.http://www.kidney-international.org chapter 3.9
&2012 KDIGO
66 Kidney International Supplements (2012) 2, 37–68
N-ACETYLCYSTEINE (NAC)
3.9.2: We suggest not using NAC to prevent AKI in
critically ill patients with hypotension. ( 2D)
RATIONALE
NAC has been most frequently applied in the prevention
of CI-AKI, and this topic is discussed in more detail inChapter 4.4.
NAC is a modiﬁed form of L-cysteine, an amino acid that
is a precursor to reduced glutathione that can regenerateglutathione stores. It is known to be a potent antioxidant thatscavenges oxygen-free radicals in the body. It also hasvasodilatory properties derived from enhanced nitric oxideavailability.
359NAC has been shown to attenuate ischemic
and nephrotoxic ARF in a number of animal studies,360–363
and the pharmacological characteristics of NAC that couldplay a role in the prevention of AKI have recently been
summarized.
364NAC undergoes extensive ﬁrst-pass metabo-
lization in the gastric mucosa and liver. This results in a very
low oral bioavailability, with substantial intrapatient varia-bility (3–20%), as well as inconsistency between availableoral products. The plasma half-life of acetylcysteine afteri.v. injection is approximately 6– 40 minutes, and there isextensive binding to plasma and tissue proteins throughthe sulfhydryl group. Virtually no acetylcysteine can be
detected in the systemic circulation after i.v. or oral
administration, suggesting that any potential therapeuticbeneﬁt must be due to secondary effects such as theinduction of glutathione synthesis, rather than due to directeffects. As these secondary effects are not directly measurable,the determination of the optimal dosage schedule has beennecessarily empirical.
365
A particularly important problem with NAC is whether it
can alter SCr independent of a change in GFR. NAC has beenreported to decrease SCr levels in subjects with normalkidney function. This reduction in SCr was not accompaniedby a change in serum cystatin C levels. This suggests an effectindependent of a change in GFR, such as an increase intubular secretion of creatinine or a decrease in creatinineproduction.
366By contrast, in vitro analysis on the effect of
NAC on SCr367showed no analytical interference with the
measurement of SCr by any of the commonly used analyticalmethods. Haase et al .,
368studied 30 patients with normal
kidney function who received i.v. NAC for 24 hours inassociation with cardiac surgery. No change in the ratio ofSCr to cystatin C, compared to baseline values, was observedat the end of the 24-hour infusion or 48 hours after thecessation of the infusion. In addition, there was no effect onurinary creatinine excretion during the infusion. However, in
clinical practice, NAC is generally recommended for patients
with CKD, with an eGFR o60 ml/min per 1.73 m
2. Mainra
et al.,369observed no change in SCr or cystatin C at 4, 24, or
48 hours after administration of a single 600-mg dose of NACto 30 patients with CKD Stage 3. Finally, Rehman et al.,
370tested the potentially confounding effect of NAC in a CKDpopulation (Stages 3– 5) following doses of NAC currentlyrecommended for prophylaxis of AKI. There was no effect ofNAC on either SCr or cystatin C levels.
It is thus safe to conclude that NAC, in doses currently
recommended for prophylaxis of AKI, has—by itself—noeffect on SCr or cystatin C levels. In addition, NAC isinexpensive and appears to be safe, although it may have
some detrimental effects on myocardial and coagulation
function.
371–373The ‘‘safety’’ of NAC should further be
amended, particularly when high i.v. doses are used, as insome of the RCTs in CI-AKI. When prospectively studied inacetaminophen poisoning, i.v. NAC produced anaphylactoidreactions in up to 48% of participants.
374Although most of
these reactions were mild, at least one death has beenreported in a patient with asthma.
375It should also be noted
that the doses of acetaminophen used are still much higherthan in the ‘‘high doses’’ used, particularly in AKI trials.Besides the prevention of CI-AKI, NAC has also been testedin the setting of cardiothoracic surgery and liver transplanta-tion, and in hypotensive critically ill patients.
NAC IN CRITICALLY ILL PATIENTS
3.9.3: We recommend not using oral or i.v. NAC for
prevention of postsurgical AKI. ( 1A)
RATIONALE
The above recommendation is based on an evaluation ofthe available literature on prevention studies with NAC incardiovascular and abdominal vascular surgery, and liver
transplantation.
The tables summarize the RCTs where either oral or i.v.
NAC was compared to placebo; only studies containing a
minimum of 50 patients in each study arm have beenincluded. In addition, a recent meta-analysis is available,
376
containing 10 studies involving a total of 1193 adult patientsundergoing major surgery. Seven studies (1003 patients)evaluated the effects of NAC in patients undergoing cardiac
surgery, and three of these (508 patients) exclusively studied
patients with pre-existing renal impairment. Two studies(111 patients) evaluated the effects of NAC on patientsundergoing abdominal aneurysm repair surgery and onestudy (79 patients) was of patients undergoing majorabdominal cancer surgery. End-points in most of the studieswere mortality, need for RRT, or varying increases inpostoperative SCr concentrations compared to preoperative
SCr values.
Suppl Tables 17 and 18 summarize the ﬁve studies where
NAC was compared to placebo in patients undergoing
cardiac surgery and who were not exposed to radiocontrastmedia.
377–381All ﬁve studies analyzed the effects of NAC in
patients with moderate, pre-existing renal functional impair-ment. Surgery included elective or emergency coronary arterybypass graft operations or heart valve surgery. NAC was given
Kidney International Supplements (2012) 2, 37–68 67chapter 3.9
i.v. in most of the studies; mortality was evaluated at different
follow-up times; either in-hospital or at 30 or 90 days. Onlyone study found a signiﬁcantly lower mortality at 30 days.
377
None of the studies found either a difference in need for RRT,or in AKI deﬁned as variable changes in SCr after surgery. Allstudies were of A-level quality. Two relatively small studiesevaluated the effects of NAC on patients undergoingabdominal aneurysm repair surgery
382,383and did not ﬁnd
any protective effect on renal function.
Further, one meta-analysis376did not ﬁnd evidence that
NAC used perioperatively can alter mortality or renaloutcomes after major cardiovascular or abdominal cancersurgery when radiocontrast agents are not used. In none ofthe studies were signiﬁcant treatment-related adverse effectsof NAC reported. These reports suggest that NAC, in thecontext of cardiovascular surgery, is not associated with
increased risk of mortality, surgical re-exploration, or
allogeneic transfusion.
Only one single study has compared NAC to placebo in
critically ill patients (Suppl Table 18).
384One hundred and
forty-two ICU patients with new-onset (within 12 hours) ofat leastX30 consecutive minutes of hypotension and/or
vasopressor requirement were randomized to receive eitheroral NAC or placebo for 7 days, in addition to standard
supportive therapy. AKI was deﬁned as X0.5 mg/dl
(X44mmol/l) increase in SCr. Patients who received NAC
had an incidence of AKI of 15.5%, compared to 16.9% in
those receiving placebo (NS). There were no signiﬁcantdifferences between treatment arms in any of the secondaryoutcomes examined, including incidence of a 50% increase inSCr, maximal rise in creatinine, recovery of renal function,length of ICU and hospital stay, and requirement for RRT.
Mortality in both arms was 10%. Based on this single study,
which is underpowered but did not show any beneﬁcial effecton incidence of AKI, need for RRT, or patient mortality, wesuggest not using NAC to prevent AKI in critically ill patientswith hypotension.SPONSORSHIP
KDIGO gratefully acknowledges the following sponsors thatmake our initiatives possible: Abbott, Amgen, Belo Founda-tion, Coca-Cola Company, Dole Food Company, Genzyme,Hoffmann-LaRoche, JC Penney, NATCO—The Organizationfor Transplant Professionals, NKF—Board of Directors,Novartis, Robert and Jane Cizik Foundation, Shire, Trans-western Commercial Services, and Wyeth. KDIGO is
supported by a consortium of sponsors and no funding is
accepted for the development of speciﬁc guidelines.
DISCLAIMER
While every effort is made by the publishers, editorial board,and ISN to see that no inaccurate or misleading data, opinionor statement appears in this Journal, they wish to make it clearthat the data and opinions appearing in the articles andadvertisements herein are the responsibility of the contributor,copyright holder, or advertiser concerned. Accordingly, thepublishers and the ISN, the editorial board and their respective
employers, ofﬁce and agents accept no liability whatsoever for
the consequences of any such inaccurate or misleading data,opinion or statement. While every effort is made to ensure thatdrug doses and other quantities are presented accurately,readers are advised that new methods and techniquesinvolving drug usage, and described within this Journal,should only be followed in conjunction with the drugmanufacturer’s own published literature.
SUPPLEMENTARY MATERIAL
Supplementary Table 15: Evidence profile of RCT examining on vs. off
pump cardiothoracic surgery.
Supplementary Table 16: Summary table of RCTs examining the effect
of on vs. off pump CABG for the prevention of AKI.
Supplementary Table 17: Evidence profile of RCTs examining NAC vs.
placebo in the prevention of AKI.
Supplementary Table 18: Summary table of RCTs examining the effect
of NAC vs. placebo in the prevention of AKI.
Supplementary material is linked to the online version of the paper at
http://www.kdigo.org/clinical_practice_guidelines/AKI.php
68 Kidney International Supplements (2012) 2, 37–68chapter 3.9
Section 4: Contrast-induced AKI
Kidney International Supplements (2012) 2,69– 88; doi:10.1038/kisup.2011.34
Chapter 4.1: Contrast-induced AKI: definition,
epidemiology, and prognosis
BACKGROUND
Contrast-related acute kidney problems are frequent and
occur in both ambulatory and hospitalized patients. Since
there is accumulating evidence that many risk factors,
preventive measures, and the immediate and long-termprognosis of these problems are common to the other causesof AKI, the Work Group believes that there is a need for aunifying deﬁnition for all forms of AKI and thereforeproposes that the term contrast-induced acute kidney injury(CI-AKI) be used for patients developing AKI secondary tointravascular radiocontrast media exposure.
The literature on CI-AKI is predominantly related to AKI
following iodinated contrast-media administration. As willbe discussed in Appendix E, non–iodine contrast media—notably Gd-containing contrast media—may also occasion-ally induce AKI.
4.1: Deﬁne and stage AKI after administration of intra-
vascular contrast media as per Recommendations
2.1.1–2.1.2. ( Not Graded )
4.1.1: In individuals who develop changes in
kidney function after administration of intra-vascular contrast media, evaluate for CI-AKIas well as for other possible causes of AKI.(Not Graded )
RATIONALE
Pending the validation of future biomarkers which wouldallow a more straightforward comparison and integration ofCI-AKI in the overall framework of AKI, we suggest that thesame criteria, using the changes in SCr concentrations andurine output be used as for the other forms of AKI. The WorkGroup is not aware of any pathophysiological or epidemio-logical reason why the deﬁnition and staging of CI-AKIshould be different from the RIFLE/AKIN criteria. It should,
however, be stressed that for the development of this
guideline, the term contrast-induced nephropathy is widelyused in the literature and usually deﬁned as a rise in SCrofX0.5 mg/dl ( X44mmol/l) or a 25% increase from base-
line value, assessed at 48 hours after a radiological proce-dure. This deﬁnition also consistently predicted majoradverse cardiovascular events after percutaneous coronaryintervention.
385The Society of Urogenital Radiology used the
same deﬁnition, but the creatinine changes were said to occurwithin 3 days after intravascular administration of contrastmedia without an alternative etiology.
386It should be
recognized that, in a minority of cases, the peak increase ofSCr may occur up until 5 days after contrast exposure.However, a recent prospective study
387showed that the
percentage change of SCr 12 h after contrast vs. the basalvalue was the best predictor of CI-AKI ( Po0.001). A 5%
increase of its value yielded 75% sensitivity and 72%speciﬁcity, with an area under the curve (AUC) of 0.80 andan OR of 7.37 (95% CI 3.34–16.23) for early detection.Furthermore, this 12-hour basal value strongly correlatedwith the development of renal impairment at 30 days(P¼0.002; sensitivity 87%, speciﬁcity 70%; AUC 0.85; OR
13.29; 95% CI 2.91–60.64).
It has been shown that substantial variation in SCr may
occur from day to day in hospitalized patients who do notreceive contrast-media injections.
388Depending on the
threshold criterion for CI-AKI chosen, this variation canlead to rates of 6–35% of inpatients, not exposed to contrastmedia, who would be labeled as having CI-AKI had theyreceived contrast media. The exact cause of this ‘‘hospital-
induced nephropathy’’
389is not known, but other studies
have shown that AKI (various etiologies) is common in
hospitalized patients.
The magnitude of the impact of the ‘‘background
ﬂuctuation of kidney function’’ in patients receiving iodinatedcontrast has not been prospectively studied, but a recent retro-spective study compared the incidence of AKI among patientsundergoing enhanced computed tomography (CT) with i.v.
low-osmolar (iohexol) or iso-osmolar (iodixanol) contrast
media to the AKI incidence among patients undergoing CTwithout contrast-media administration.
390The incidence of
AKI (deﬁned as an increase of SCr of 0.5 mg/dl [44 mmol/l] or
aX25% decrease in eGFR within 3 days after CT) was similar
in all three groups (two receiving contrast agents and one not)up to a baseline SCr level of 1.8 mg/dl (159 mmol/l). A high
incidence of ‘‘AKI’’ among control subjects undergoing
noncontrast CT was thus identiﬁed. Given the results of this
retrospective study, it is clear that AKI after i.v. administrationhttp://www.kidney-international.org chapter 4.1
&2012 KDIGO
Kidney International Supplements (2012) 2, 69–88 69
of iodine contrast media cannot be automatically attributed
to the contrast agent, but may, in fact, reﬂect AKI from othercauses, such as worsening underlying disease or drug toxicity.Therefore, the Work Group strongly recommends thatindividuals showing increases of SCr compatible with thedeﬁnition of AKI after administration of intravascular contrastmedia be also evaluated for other possible causes of AKI.
In a study using cystatin C as an early marker for AKI,
a cut-off cystatin C increase concentration of X10% at 24
hours after contrast-media exposure was detected in 87patients (21.2%), and was the best cut-off value for the earlyidentiﬁcation of patients at risk for CI-AKI with a negativepredictive value of 100% and a positive predictive value of39%. As in other cases of AKI, it appears that, in patientswith CKD, cystatin C may be a useful marker for the earlydiagnosis of CI-AKI.
Epidemiology of CI-AKI
Keeping the above-mentioned problems of deﬁnition inmind, it is not surprising that the reported incidence ofCI-AKI varies widely across the literature, depending on thedeﬁnitions used, the patient population, and the baseline riskfactors.
The. impact of different deﬁnitions on the incidence of
CI-AKI can be illustrated by the recent results of the OxilanRegistry.
391In this registry, CI-AKI was deﬁned as either a
SCr increase 40.5 mg/dl ( 444mmol/l), or a SCr increase
425%, or a decrease 425% of eGFR, or the composite of
all three deﬁnitions. The baseline SCr was 1.12 ±0.3 mg/dl
(99±26.5mmol/l) and 24% had an eGFR o60 ml/min.
CI-AKI rates were 3.3% (SCr increase 40.5 mg/dl
[444mmol/l]), 10.2% (SCr increase 425%), 7.6% (eGFR
decrease 425%), and 10.5% (composite), respectively.
It is accepted that, in patients with normal renal function—
even in the presence of diabetes—the risk for CI-AKI is low(1– 2%).
392However, the incidence may be as high as 25% in
patients with pre-existing renal impairment or in presence ofcertain risk factors, such as the combination of CKD anddiabetes, CHF, advanced age, and concurrent administrationof nephrotoxic drugs.
393CI-AKI was described as the third
most common cause of new AKI in hospitalized patients(after decreased renal perfusion and nephrotoxic medications)and was responsible for 11% of cases.
394
The epidemiology of de novo CI-AKI in critically ill
patients is not known. In a group of 75 ICU patients with anormal baseline SCr who were exposed to CT scans with ani.v. low-osmolar contrast medium, an increase in SCr 425%
was recorded in 18% of the patients. There was no change of
the SCr in a control group of patients undergoing CT scans
but not receiving contrast media.
395This rather small study
shows that in critically ill patients, even with an apparently‘‘normal’’ renal function, i.v. administration of iodinatedcontrast media is associated with a signiﬁcant incidence ofCI-AKI.
It could be expected that radiological procedures
performed in an emergency would be associated with anincreased risk of CI-AKI but, as recently summarized,
396
the published evidence to support this premise is ratherscarce.
397
Prognosis of CI-AKI
Many studies have now shown that patients who developCI-AKI have a greater risk for death or prolonged hospitali-zation, as well as for other adverse outcomes, including early
or late cardiovascular events. The latter are more common
after, for example, percutaneous coronary interventions (forreview, see McCullough
398). In a retrospective analysis
including 27 608 patients who underwent coronary angio-graphy at the University of Pittsburgh Medical Center duringa 12-year period, discrete proportional odds models wereused to examine the association between increases in SCr and30-day in-hospital mortality and LOS, respectively. It appea-
red that small absolute (0.25–0.5 mg/dl [22–44 mmol/l]) and
relative (25– 50%) increases in SCr were associated with
risk-adjusted OR for in-hospital mortality of 1.83 and 1.39,respectively; larger increases in SCr generally were associatedwith greater risks for these clinical outcomes.
399Moreover,
when patients with CI-AKI require dialysis, the mortality ishigher compared to those not requiring dialysis. For example,in the study by McCullough et al.,
400the hospital mortality
was 7.1% in CI-AKI and 35.7% in patients who requireddialysis. By 2 years, the mortality rate in patients whorequired dialysis was 81.2%.
The more recent Cardiac Angiography in Renally
Impaired Patients study
401—a large, multicenter, prospective,
double-blind RCT of patients who had moderate to severeCKD and were undergoing cardiac angiography—alsoshowed that the adjusted incidence rate ratio for adverse
events was twice as high in those with CI-AKI. However,
these data demonstrating a temporal association between CI-AKI and short or long-term prognosis do not establish acausal relationship, since most of the patients in theseobservational studies have underlying risk factors that, inaddition to increasing the patient’s risk of CI-AKI, candirectly increase their overall risk for the complicationsstudied. Finally, many of the retrospective studies may also
have introduced selection bias for patients who presumably
had a clinical reason for having their SCr concentrationfollowed.
Data on the association between risk of ESRD and CI-AKI
are scarce. In contemporary studies, CI-AKI requiringdialysis developed in almost 4% of patients with underlyingrenal impairment and 3% of patients undergoing primarypercutaneous coronary interventions for acute coronary
syndrome. However, only a small proportion of patients
continued on chronic dialysis.
402,403Although CI-AKI
requiring dialysis is relatively rare, the impact on patientprognosis is considerable, with high hospital and 1-yearmortality rates (for a review, see McCullough
398). Only one
study404reported the incidence of new CKD Stage 4–5
(eGFRo30 ml/min) following percutaneous coronary inter-
ventions and found that this occurred in 0.3% of patients
70 Kidney International Supplements (2012) 2, 69–88chapter 4.1
with an eGFR 430 ml/min at baseline and newly diagnosed
kidney disease within 6 months after the procedure, and in
0.9% of patients with an eGFR 460 ml/min at baseline. These
percentages are higher than the estimated annual incidence ofCKD at 0.17% that was found in a British general populationcohort over a 5.5-year period of follow-up.
405Thus, careful
long-term follow-up of SCr following contrast exposure iswarranted.RESEARCH RECOMMENDATION
KLarge prospective RCTs examining the epidemiology ofCI-AKI are needed, especially on long-term outcomes,with attention to controlling for confounders.
SUPPLEMENTARY MATERIAL
Appendix E: Risks with Gadolinium-Based Contrast Agents.
Supplementary material is linked to the online version of the paper at
http://www.kdigo.org/clinical_practice_guidelines/AKI.php
Kidney International Supplements (2012) 2, 69–88 71chapter 4.1
Chapter 4.2: Assessment of the population at risk
for CI-AKI
At present, millions of doses of intravascular contrast
media are being administered worldwide.406,407Most of
these radiological examinations are performed in ambu-latory populations who do not need special preventivemeasures. However, contrast media are also increasingly usedin an elderly population, many of whom have CKD anddiabetes—the principal risk factors for CI-AKI. It is, thus,of utmost importance to screen the population at risk forCI-AKI.
4.2.1: Assess the risk for CI-AKI and, in particular,
screen for pre-existing impairment of kidney
function in all patients who are considered for aprocedure that requires intravascular (i.v. or i.a.)administration of iodinated contrast medium.(Not Graded )
RATIONALE
Screening for pre-existing impairment of kidney function
Pre-existing renal functional impairment is the most
important risk factor above all other risk factors fordeveloping CI-AKI
408and screening for both acute and
chronic kidney disease is highly recommended. There is nosharp GFR threshold below which the risk for CI-AKI is
clearly increasing. Both the KDOQI guideline and KDIGO
recommend that, in stable patients, an eGFR should beused.
409
A CI-AKI Consensus Working Panel410agreed that the risk
of CI-AKI becomes clinically important when the baselineSCr concentration is X1.3 mg/dl ( X115mmol/l) in men and
X1.0 mg/dl ( X88.4mmol/l) in women, equivalent to an
eGFRo60 ml/min per 1.73 m
2. However, Bruce et al .390
showed that the incidence of ‘‘true’’ AKI became signiﬁcantonly between controls and contrast-media administeredpatients from a baseline SCr concentration of 41.8 mg/dl
(4159mmol/l) onward. The CI-AKI Consensus Working
Panel
410recommended that precautions to reduce the risk
should be implemented in patients with a baselineeGFRo60 ml/min per 1.73 m
2. In light of more recent
information, this threshold could probably be lowered to
45 ml/min per 1.73 m2.
In many institutions, point-of-care SCr testing is present,
and the results can be available quite fast. In places without
point-of-care laboratories, the appropriate blood tests shouldbe requested, but an emergent imaging/intervention, wherethe beneﬁt of very early imaging outweighs the risk of
waiting, should not be delayed.
For its relative simplicity, only SCr is used at many
hospitals to determine whether a patient is a candidate
for intravascular contrast-media administration, but thethresholds used and the acceptable time between thedetermined SCr value and administration of contrast mediato perform the radiology examination differs amongradiology departments.
Risk-factor questionnaire
For outpatient radiological studies where renal function dataare unavailable, a simple survey or questionnaire may beused to identify outpatients at higher risk for AKI in whomappropriate precautions should be taken.
Choyke et al .
411(Figure 13) used a questionnaire and
could identify a high proportion of patients with normal SCrconcentrations, and reduced by 67% the number of patientsin whom SCr measurement was necessary before imagingstudies.
The European Society of Urogenital Radiology
386recom-
mends a risk-factor analysis based on the Choyke ques-tionnaire to identify patients with a higher risk of abnormalrenal function. The CI-AKI Consensus Working Panel
410
considered that a survey or questionnaire may be a usefulguide for identifying patients at higher risk for CI-AKIcompared to the general population.
Urinary protein screening
The CI-AKI Consensus Working Panel also supported theuse of dipstick testing for urine protein as a rapid screen to
identify patients who can undergo studies requiring contrast
media without SCr measurement.
410Of 310 patients with a
negative urine protein test and no history of diseases poten-tially associated with renal impairment, none had a SCrlevel42.0 mg/dl ( 4177mmol/l), and only 1% had a level
41.7 mg/dl ( 4150mmol/l).
Thus, the Work Group recommends that, when a recent
SCr is not available, a simple questionnaire or a dipstick
testing for urine protein may be useful for identifying
pre-existing kidney disease. Risk stratiﬁcation hinges on age,baseline kidney function, other comorbidities, and other riskfactors.http://www.kidney-international.org chapter 4.2
&2012 KDIGO
72 Kidney International Supplements (2012) 2, 69–88
Other risk factors of CI-AKI
Besides pre-existing kidney disease with renal function
impairment, other risk factors for developing CI-AKIinclude diabetes, hypertension, CHF, advanced age, volume
depletion, hemodynamic instability, use of concurrent
nephrotoxic medications, and large volume or high osmol-ality of the contrast agent.
408,412Although there is doubt that
diabetes by itself is an independent risk factor, in a patientwith CKD it acts as a risk multiplier.
398Metabolic syndrome,
prediabetes, and hyperuricemia have been identiﬁed asnew risk factors for CI-AKI, while the use of ACE-I andangiotensin-receptor blockers (ARB), renal transplantation,
diabetes mellitus with normal renal function, low-osmolar
contrast media, multiple myeloma, female gender, andcirrhosis have been classiﬁed as conﬂicting risk factors forCI-AKI.
413There are conﬂicting data on the impact of ACE-I
or ARB but, overall, there is currently insufﬁcient evidence torecommend discontinuation of these medications prior tocontrast-media administration.
When possible, the administration of contrast media
should be delayed in patients with circulatory collapse orCHF until their hemodynamic status is corrected. Repeatedexposure should be delayed for 48 hours in patientswithout risk factors for CI-AKI, and for 72 hours in thosewith diabetes mellitus or pre-existing chronic renal dysfunc-tion. If acute renal dysfunction develops after contrast-mediaadministration, repeated exposure should preferably bedelayed until the SCr level has returned to baseline levels.
414
Concurrent nephrotoxic medication—including, in
particular, NSAIDs, aminoglycosides, amphotericin B, highdoses of loop diuretics, and antiviral drugs like acyclovirand foscarnet—should preferably be stopped. A recentstudy using a so-called forced euvolemic diuresis protocolincluding mannitol and furosemide led to a signi-ﬁcantly increased risk of CI-AKI.
415It can be advised that
such strategy should be abandoned, and that furose-mide therapy should preferably be stopped before angio-
graphy.In the past 3 months have you been told there may have been a change in your kidney function?  Y/N 
In the past 3 months have you been on any medications? Please list: Have you used any over-the-counter pain relievers within the last 10 days? Y/N  Please list: 
In the past 3 months have you had any surgery?  Y/N 
Describe: Do you feel dry or thirsty? Y/N 
Circle one 
*Have you ever been told you have kidney disease of any type?
Please describe:Y N
*Have you had kidney surgery? Y N
*Do you have diabetes?
Do you use insulin?
Do you use metformin or glucophage?Y
Y
YN
N
N
*Do you have hypertension, heart disease, or vascular disease? Y N
*Do you have gout? Y N
Do you have multiple myleoma? Y N
Have you ever had x-ray contrast media (dye) for CT, angiography, or IVP?
Have you had contrast media within the last 3 days? 
Do you have any allergies to x-ray contrast media (dye)?
Please describe:Y
Y
YN
N
N
Have you received pretreatment with medication for this study? Y N
Do you have any allergies or asthma? Please describe: Y N
Figure 13 |Sample questionnaire. Asterisks denote questions with the highest association with abnormal renal function. Adapted from
Choyke PL, Cady J, DePollar SL et al . Determination of serum creatinine prior to iodinated contrast media: is it necessary in all patients?
Tech Urol 1998; 4: 65– 69 with permission.411
Table 15 | CI-AKI risk-scoring model for percutaneous
coronary intervention
Risk factors Integer score (calculate)
Hypotension 5
IABP 5
CHF 5
Age475 years 4
Anemia 3
Diabetes 3
Contrast-media volume 1 per 100 ml
SCr41.5 mg/dl ( 4132.6mmol/l) 4
or
eGFRo60 ml/min per 1.73 m22 for 40– 60
4 for 20– 39
6 foro20
Note: Low risk: cumulative score o5; high risk: cumulative score 416.
CHF, congestive heart failure; eGFR, estimated glomerular filtration rate; IABP, intra-
aortic balloon pump; SCr, serum creatinine. Reprinted from Mehran R, Aymong ED,
Nikolsky E et al . A simple risk score for prediction of contrast-induced nephropathy
after percutaneous coronary intervention: development and initial validation. J Am
Coll Cardiol 2004; 44: 1393–1399 et al .,418copyright 2004, with permission from
American College of Cardiology Foundation; accessed http://content.onlinejacc.org/
cgi/content/full/44/7/1393
Kidney International Supplements (2012) 2, 69–88 73chapter 4.2
Risk models of CI-AKI
Most risk factors for CI-AKI can be detected by
history-taking and physical examination, and the risk risesexponentially with the number of risk factors present.
416
Validated risk-prediction models using patient and proce-dural risk factors to assess for CI-AKI have been developedfor patients undergoing percutaneous coronary inter-vention.
417,418For example, the Mehran risk model418is
given in Table 15. The overall occurrence of CI-AKI in thedevelopment set of the score was 13.1% (range 7.5% to57.3% for a low [ p5] and high [X 16] risk score,
respectively); the rate of CI-AKI increased exponentiallywith increasing risk score. In the validation dataset, theincreasing risk score was again strongly associated withCI-AKI (range 8.4% to 55.9% for the low and high risk score,respectively). These models can help in counseling about the
risks of the procedure, selecting prophylactic interventions,
and can also be used to characterize patients in studies ofCI-AKI.
4.2.2: Consider alternative imaging methods in patients
at increased risk for CI-AKI. ( Not Graded )
RATIONALE
The selection and advantages and disadvantages of non-
iodinated contrast media are beyond the scope of theseguidelines. Detailed discussions of all these techniques canbe found in radiology textbooks and the radiology litera-
ture. The Work Group suggests that, in patients at increased
risk for CI-AKI, the risks and beneﬁts of iodinatedcontrast-media administration should be discussed with theradiologist.
Because of the great relevance for the nephrologist,
radiologist, and cardiologist of the side-effects of Gd chelatesused in magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), a short overviewof their nephrotoxicity is given here.
Nephrotoxicity of Gd chelates
Gd chelates are widely used as MRI contrast agents, and
are considered to have a good overall safety proﬁle. Early
on, phase III trials and small studies in low-risk patientssuggested a benign renal proﬁle; however, more recentstudies raised the possibility of nephrotoxicity, althoughit is not clear whether it approaches the incidence ofAKI associated with iodine-containing contrast media.Gd-related AKI appears to be a risk in patients with advancedkidney disease, especially those with diabetic nephro-
pathy.
419,420Perazella et al .420have summarized studies
showing Gd-induced nephrotoxic AKI compared to
CI-AKI.421–425Studies in patients with underlying kidney
disease demonstrate the importance of renal clearance indetermining the pharmacokinetic proﬁle of Gd chelates.
426
More details on the pharmacokinetics of Gd chelates andtheir dialyzability are provided in Appendix E.Nephrogenic systemic fibrosis (NSF)
The risk of developing NSF with Gd, particularly in patientswith severe AKI and CKD, is reviewed in detail in Appendix E.It should be noted here that the European MedicinesAgency stated a contraindication for use of gadodiamide inpatients with a GFR o30 ml/min per 1.73 m
2, and issued a
warning for its use in patients who have a GFR between 30and 60 ml/min per 1.73 m
2(EMEA Public assessment report.
http://www.esur.org/ﬁleadmin/N SF/Public_Assessment_Report_
NSF_Gadolinium_26_June_2007.pdf; last accessed January 5,2012). The US FDA requested that vendors add warningsabout the risk for developing NSF to the full prescri-bing information on the packaging for all Gd-containingcontrast agents (gadopentetate dimeglumine, gadodiamide,gadoversetamide, gadoteridol, gadobenate dimeglumine).
427
New labeling describes the risk for NSF following expo-
sure to Gd in patients with a GFR o30 ml/min per
1.73 m2and in patients with AKI of any severity due to
hepato-renal syndrome or in the perioperative liver trans-
plantation period. Additional recommendations wererecently proposed by Perazella
420and were endorsed by the
Work Group:
(a) Use of a macrocyclic chelate (gadoteridol in the USA),
is preferred over linear chelates. The risk associated
with the various Gd-containing agents is likely
different. Gadodiamide, the linear nonionic chelate–-based formulation, maintains the highest risk on thebasis of epidemiologic data and animal studies.Gadopentetate, the linear ionic chelate–based productprobably has a medium risk, less than the linearnonionic chelates but more than the macrocyclicchelates. Gadoteridol, the only FDA-approved macro-
cyclic chelate, maintains less risk. Clearly, high dosages
and large cumulative dosages of all these agents willincrease risk for NSF.
(b) Demonstration of significant quantities of insoluble
Gd in the skin of NSF patients, months after expo-sure to Gd-based contrast material and after exten-sive tissue processing, suggests that Gd might haveundergone transmetallation in vivo . Supporting the
importance of transmetallation, all NSF cases reportedbefore 2009 have been associated with linear MRIcontrast agents (for a review, see Kay
428) that have
inferior thermodynamic stability and a kinetic orconditional stability that favors transmetallation. How-ever, a recent case of NSF in a dialysis patient afterexposure to a macrocyclic chelate has been described,
429
and at least two additional cases are known.430
(c) Use the lowest dosage of the agent possible to achieve
the image.
(d) Avoid repeat exposures with Gd.(e) Consider performing IHD after the exposure (and
the next 2 days) in patients who are already main-tained on IHD, recognizing that there are no datathat support prevention of NSF with this modality.
74 Kidney International Supplements (2012) 2, 69–88chapter 4.2
This recommendation is based on the pharmaco-
kinetics of Gd and the theoretical benefit of removingit with IHD ( 495% plasma clearance). PD clears these
agents rather poorly.SUPPLEMENTARY MATERIAL
Appendix E: Risks with Gadolinium-Based Contrast Agents.
Supplementary material is linked to the online version of the paper at
http://www.kdigo.org/clinical_practice_guidelines/AKI.php
Kidney International Supplements (2012) 2, 69–88 75chapter 4.2
Chapter 4.3: Nonpharmacological prevention
strategies of CI-AKI
There have been a large number of strategies/agents evaluated
to prevent CI-AKI. Sterling et al.431have recently summa-
rized most of these strategies and classiﬁed them as having
either deﬁnitive, possible, or doubtful value. From the many
strategies, these authors only retain parenteral volumeexpansion, minimizing contrast-media volume, use of low-osmolar and iso-osmolar contrast media, and administrationof non-iodinated contrast media as strategies with deﬁnitivevalue. A recent comprehensive meta-analysis by Kellyet al.
432—including RCTs that administered NAC, theophyl-
line, fenoldopam, dopamine, iloprost, statins, furosemide,
or mannitol, and covering studies up to November 2006—
provides an excellent overview.
DOSE/VOLUME OF CONTRAST-MEDIA ADMINISTRATION
4.3.1: Use the lowest possible dose of contrast medium in
patients at risk for CI-AKI. ( Not Graded )
RATIONALE
The correlation between the volume of contrast mediaadministered and the risk of CI-AKI has been recognized.
433
In the vast majority of papers dealing with CI-AKI aftercoronary procedures, contrast-media doses are only ex-pressed in volumes. The Work Group feels that such
expression can be misleading, since commercially available
contrast-media concentrations range from 140 to 400milligrams of iodine per milliliter, a difference with almosta factor of 3. The Work Group recommends, therefore, thatthe dose of contrast medium should be better expressed inrelation to both volume and concentration, e.g., gramsiodine, which also directly relates to the diagnostic capacity,the primary purpose of the contrast medium. Such ‘‘double’’
expression would also facilitate the comparison between
different studies on epidemiology and prognosis of CI-AKI.
It is well known that, when measuring the plasma
clearance of a GFR marker (e.g., with the contrast mediumiohexol), the AUC is directly related to the dose of iohexoland inversely related to the GFR. Thus, by mathematicallyestimating the AUC and knowing the injected iodinedose, the GFR can be calculated by dose CAUC. Thus,
AUC¼doseCGFR, and AUC is directly related to the
systemic exposure of a drug, including the contrast medium,which, in turn, is mostly correlated with its efﬁcacy andtoxicity.
434An interesting experimental study435investigated
the correlation between the calculated dose to CrCl ratio andthe experimentally measured AUC for the contrast agentiodixanol. The experimentally determined AUC data correlatedhighly with the dose:CrCl ratio. This ratio could thus be a rapid
and accurate way to estimate AUC for an iodinated contrast
medium, without the need for multiple blood samples.
A recent study by Nyman et al.
436in patients undergoing
coronary angioplasty calculated the probability of CI-AKI(SCr rise 40.5 mg/dl [ 444.2mmol/l] or oliguria/anuria) at
various eGFR levels based on g-I (grams iodine)/eGFR ratiosof 1:2, 1:1, 2:1, and 3:1. At a ratio o1, the risk of CI-AKI
was 3%, while it was 25% at a ratio X1. This, and other
preliminary studies, indicate that a g-I/GFR ratio o1 may be
relatively safe in a patient without multiple risk factors.
436–438
Finally, the association between absolute and body weight-
and SCr-adjusted contrast-media volume, CI-AKI incidence(X25% SCr increase), and clinical outcome was prospec-
tively investigated in patients with acute MI.
439For each
patient, the maximum contrast-medium dose was calculatedaccording to the formula (5 /C2body weight [kg]) CSCr, and
the contrast-medium ratio—deﬁned as the ratio between thecontrast-medium volume administered and the maximumdose calculated—was assessed. Development of CI-AKI wasassociated with both contrast-medium volume and ratio.Additional radiological measures to reduce CI-AKI can befound in Table 16.
Route of administration of contrast media
The risk of CI-AKI appears to be greater after arterialcompared to venous administration of contrast media.Indeed, in the rare studies where an appropriate controlgroup without contrast media was included, no signiﬁcant
difference was observed in the rate of CI-AKI between the
patients who received i.v. iodinated contrast media and thecontrol subjects who did not.
440–442Thus, the risk of CI-AKI
with i.v. contrast medium is probably very low. CI-AKIreportedly occurs after i.v. contrast-medium injection for CTin only 4% of patients with CKD.
443Katzberg and Lamba444
summarized the six studies on CI-AKI after i.v. contrast-medium administration in patients at risk and all suffering
from moderate CKD. The overall incidence of CI-AKI in
these studies, using the current generation of low-osmolarcontrast media, was about 5%.
Given the logistic challenges in the outpatient setting, the
use of speciﬁc prophylactic measures prior to administrationof i.v. contrast media could be limited to those subjectswho are at higher levels of baseline risk than they would bewhen an i.a. procedure was planned.
445This conclusion, mayhttp://www.kidney-international.org chapter 4.3
&2012 KDIGO
76 Kidney International Supplements (2012) 2, 69–88
however, be too optimistic when applied to critically ill
patients undergoing emergency CT scans.395
The majority of the literature covering CI-AKI and its
prevention involves i.a. iodinated contrast-medium admin-
istration.445,446The higher risk of CI-AKI after i.a. admin-
istration is probably due to the more direct exposure of the
kidneys to contrast media,447or to the fact that, in general,
i.a. contrast-media examinations are performed in patientswho carry a higher risk.
RESEARCH RECOMMENDATIONS
KRandomized trials should explore whether there is needfor discontinuation of ACE-I and/or ARBs in patients atrisk for CI-AKI.
KAdditional studies are needed to better determine the
exact relationship between the dose of contrast media and
the risk for CI-AKI.
SELECTION OF A CONTRAST AGENT
4.3.2: We recommend using either iso-osmolar or low-
osmolar iodinated contrast media, rather than
high-osmolar iodinated contrast media in patients
at increased risk of CI-AKI. ( 1B)
RATIONALE
This recommendation is supported by the summary tables ofthe different RCTs and on the evidence proﬁle tables (SupplTables 19– 21).High-osmolar vs. iso-osmolar or low-osmolar contrast media
The recommendation to avoid high-osmolar contrast mediais based on older literature, since recent RCTs comparinghigh- vs. low- and iso-osmolar iodine-based contrast media
are not available. In addition, high-osmolar contrast media
have virtually been abandoned in modern radiological units.Both the review of Goldfarb et al.,
448and the meta-analysis of
Barrett and Carlisle combining 24 randomized studies449
suggest that the risk of CI-AKI is similarly low with high-osmolar and low-osmolar agents among otherwise stablepatients with normal renal function, but that in contrast tohigh-osmolar contrast media, low-osmolar contrast media
are less nephrotoxic in patients with pre-existing kidney
function impairment.
Low-osmolar vs. iso-osmolar contrast media
The present hotly debated question is whether iso-osmolarcontrast media are safer than low-osmolar contrast media inhigh-risk patients. This question has been the subject of anumber of randomized trials as well as systematic reviewsand meta-analyses (Suppl Tables 19– 21).
We separated studies meeting our inclusion criteria (see
Chapter 1.2) into those administering i.a. or i.v. contrastmedia. We used the general deﬁnitions of CI-AKI provided in
the studies (an increase in SCr by 425% or 0.5 mg/dl
[44.2mmol/l]) occurring within 72 hours after contrast-
medium administration, in the absence of an alternative
etiology for the decrease in kidney function.Table 16 | Additional radiological measures to reduce CI-AKI
Some CT strategies in patients at risk of CI-AKI
K Perform CT, when possible, without contrast media; scrutinize the examination and discuss with the referral physician-surgeon before deciding on
the need for contrast media.
K Dosing per kilogram body weight to reduce the amount of contrast media is needed in thin patients.
K Adapt injection duration to scan duration when performing CT-angiography, so that the injection is not still running when the scan is finished.
K Use a saline chaser to decrease the amount of contrast media, by using the contrast medium that otherwise would remain in the dead space of thearm veins; this may save 10– 20 ml of contrast media.
K Use 80 kVp; contrast-medium dose may be reduced by a factor of 1.5– 1.7 compared to the dose used at 120 kVp since iodine attenuation increases,and combine with increased tube loading (mAs) to maintain signal-to-noise ratio.
K Further reduction of contrast media may be instituted in patients with known decreased cardiac output (not unusual in patients with renalimpairment) undergoing CT-angiographic studies.
Some angiographic strategies in patients at risk of CI-AKI
K Use biplane when appropriate.
K Avoid test injections; the same amount may be enough for a diagnostic digital-subtraction angiography run.
K Scrutinize each series before performing the next; avoid unnecessary projections.
K Decrease kilovoltage in a thin patient; a lower iodine concentration may be used.
K Assess the physiologic significance of a stenosis by measurement of translesional pressure gradient and fractional flow reserve, a technique wellaccepted and validated for the coronary circulation. For different arterial beds, perform manometry of a questionable stenosis instead of multipleprojections.
K Avoid ventriculography: echocardiography (and ‘‘echo contrast’’) is always a reasonable alternative.
K Use plasma isotonic contrast-media concentrations for renal artery injections.
K When renal artery stenosis is suspected, map the origin of major renal arteries with noninvasive procedures (e.g., CT without contrast media) forproper initial renal angiographic projections to avoid unnecessary runs, or perform primary manometry.
K CO 2may be used as contrast medium in venous examinations and below the diaphragm for arterial examinations or alternatively use iodinated
contrast media with the same contrast effect, i.e., about 40 mg iodine per milliliter.
K Since the contrast effect of 0.5 M Gd-contrast media has been regarded as diagnostic by many investigators (coronary, renal, aortofemoralarteriography, etc.), iodinated contrast media may be diluted to the same density, i.e., about 75 mg iodine per milliliter.
K Use selective or superselective catheterizations when appropriate, e.g., ‘‘single leg run-off’’.
K Reduce aortic flow and amount of contrast medium by temporal occlusion of femoral arteries with tourniquets when performing aortography.
Gd, gadolinium; kVp, peak kilovoltage.
Kidney International Supplements (2012) 2, 69–88 77chapter 4.3
In total, 14 RCTs fulﬁlling the search criteria were found.
Ten RCTs were found with i.a. and four RCTs with i.v.
injection, respectively (Suppl Tables 19–21). There is onlymoderate quality of evidence and overall, no beneﬁt—or, at
least, no consistent beneﬁt—was found of nonionic iso-
osmolar (iodixanol) contrast media compared to low-osmolar ionic or nonionic contrast media. In eight studiescomparing contrast media given i.a.
401,450–456some showed
superiority of iso-osmolar contrast media (iodixanol),compared to iohexol
450and iopromide.455There was no
difference when iodixanol was compared to iopamidol,401,452
iopromide,451,453and ioversal.456
The most recent prospective, multicenter, randomized,
double-blind study compared the renal effects of iodixanol tothe nonionic, low-osmolar agent iopamidol, in 526 subjectswith CKD and diabetes mellitus undergoing diagnosticand/or therapeutic coronary angiography.
454The overall
CI-AKI incidence was 10.5% (11.2% % in the iodixanolarm and 9.8% in the iopamidol arm, NS). The volume ofcontrast medium, volume of saline administered, frequency
of coronary interventional procedures, and severity of
baseline kidney disease and of diabetes mellitus were similarbetween treatments.
Finally, a recent meta-analysis
457(Figure 14) analyzed
studies comparing iodixanol with low-osmolar contrastmedia. The pooled RR was 0.68 (95% CI 0.46–1.01;P¼0.06). In studies that included patients with normal
renal function after i.a. contrast-media administration, the
RR was 0.82 (95% CI 0.45–1.51; P¼0.53). In the studies that
included only patients with decreased kidney function after
i.a. contrast-media administration, the RR was 0.59 (95% CI0.33–1.07; P¼0.08). However, in all three studies in which
iohexol was the low-osmolar contrast medium used, the riskof CI-AKI was signiﬁcantly lower with iodixanol (RR 0.38;95% CI 0.21–0.68; Po0.01). In contrast, the risk of CI-AKI
did not signiﬁcantly differ in the two studies in whichiodixanol was compared to other low-osmolar contrastagents (RR 0.95; 95% CI 0.50–1.78; P¼0.86). Iodixanol is
thus not associated with a signiﬁcantly reduced risk of CI-AKI compared to the low-osmolar contrast media pooled
together. However, in patients with decreased kidney
function, iodixanol is associated with a reduced risk of CI-AKI compared to iohexol.
The clinical heterogeneity between all these studies, as far
as basal kidney function and prevalence of diabetes mellitusare concerned, hampers the ability to compare the resultsacross studies, but can widen the applicability of consistentﬁndings across different risk groups provided the mechan-
isms of contrast-induced nephrotoxicity are the same. One
should note, also, that in all these studies different deﬁnitionsof CI-AKI have been used and that the timing of SCrmeasurements after contrast-media injection was not uni-form. It has been shown that different time-points for themeasurement of CI-AKI can give different results.
458One
may expect that those studies with a standardized andsimultaneous measurement of renal function between the
two arms are probably the most conclusive. Finally, different
types and amounts of volume expansion and differentpharmacological preventive strategies have been usedthroughout the studies, making conclusive comparisonsvirtually impossible.
i.a. Iodixanol vs. ioxaglate
Two studies fulﬁlled our inclusion criteria; one study459
showed a superiority of iodixanol vs. ioxaglate, but this wasnot conﬁrmed in the study by Mehran et al.,
460who found no
difference between these two contrast agents. Although
overall the number of patients is substantial, there is
heterogeneity among the comparators with which iodixanolhas been compared. In addition, the cost of iodixanol isprobably higher than the cost of most of the low-osmolarcontrast agents. No studies comparing a possible difference
Figure 14 |Risk for contrast-induced nephropathy. (a) Iodixanol vs. iohexol and risk for contrast-induced nephropathy; ( b) iodixanol vs.
nonionic low-osmolar contrast media other than iohexol and risk for contrast-induced nephropathy. Reprinted from Heinrich MC, Haberle L,
Muller V et al . Nephrotoxicity of iso-osmolar iodixanol compared with nonionic low osmolar contrast media: meta-analysis of randomized
controlled trials. Radiology 2009; 250: 68– 86 with permission, copyright 2009, from Radiological Society of North America457; accessed
http://radiology.rsna.org/content/250/1/68.long
78 Kidney International Supplements (2012) 2, 69–88chapter 4.3
among low-osmolar contrast media have been performed.
Based on evidence proﬁles (Suppl Tables 19 and 20) andthe most recent meta-analysis
457(Figure 14) of the studies
comparing i.a. administration of iso- vs. low-osmolarcontrast media, the Work Group found no evidence torecommend a preference for either type of agent.
i.v. Administration
There are four studies following i.v. injections fulﬁlling ourinclusion criteria: Barrett et al.,
443Kuhn et al.,461Thomsen
et al.,462and Nguyen et al.463The overall conclusion, based
on the evidence proﬁle summarized in Suppl Table 20comparing i.v. iso- vs. low-osmolar contrast media, is thatthere is no beneﬁt for the nonionic iso-osmolar agent(iodixanol); the overall quality of the evidence is moderate.This conclusion is supported by the above-mentioned recentmeta-analysis
457which, in seven studies comparing i.v.
contrast-media administration with iodixanol vs. low-osmolarcontrast media, showed no statistically signiﬁcant difference
for CI-AKI (RR 1.08; 95% CI 0.62– 1.89; P¼0.79). Subgroup
analysis did not show superiority of any agent in studies of
individuals with normal kidney function (RR 1.12; 95% CI0.35– 3.65; P¼0.85) or in studies of individuals with reduced
kidney function (RR 1.07; 95% CI 0.56– 2.02; P¼0.84).
In head-to-head comparisons with different low-osmolar
agents, iodixanol has been shown to be superior toiopromide, but not to iopamidol and iomeprol. It is,however, difﬁcult to determine whether this is simply dueto spurious ﬁndings in a smaller number of comparisons, ordue to true differences between low-osmolar agents. Untilbetter head-to-head comparative studies among the differentcontrast media agents are available, the Work Group isunable to draw deﬁnite conclusions on the selection ofiso-osmolar vs. low-osmolar contrast media.
RESEARCH RECOMMENDATION
KAdditional studies with head-to-head comparisons
among the different contrast media should be performed
in order to draw definite conclusions on the selectionof iso-osmolar vs. low-osmolar contrast media. A moreuniform definition of CI-AKI, as suggested in thisguideline, should be used as the end-point.
SUPPLEMENTARY MATERIAL
Supplementary Table 19: Evidence profile of RCTs examining the effect
of intrarterial isosmolar vs. low osmolar contrast agent on the
prevention of CI-AKI.Supplementary Table 20: Evidence profile of RCTs examining the effect
of intravenous isosmolar vs. low osmolar contrast agent on theprevention of CI-AKI.Supplementary Table 21: Summary table of RCTs examining the effect of
isosmolar vs. low osmolar contrast agent on the prevention of CI-AKI.
Supplementary material is linked to the online version of the paper at
http://www.kdigo.org/clinical_practice_guidelines/AKI.php
Kidney International Supplements (2012) 2, 69–88 79chapter 4.3
Chapter 4.4: Pharmacological prevention strategies
of CI-AKI
FLUID ADMINISTRATION
Extracellular volume expansion at the time of radiocontrast-
media administration may serve to counteract both the
intrarenal hemodynamic alterations and the direct tubulo-toxic effects that play a role in the pathophysiology of CI-AKI. Neurohumoral effects of volume expansion that mayattenuate radiocontrast-induced medullary hypoxia includesuppression of vasopressin as well as inhibition of the renin-angiotensin axis; but an increased synthesis of vasodilatoryrenal prostaglandins may also play a role.
464
Volume expansion may also directly reduce cellular
damage by dilution of the contrast medium, particularly inthe medullary tubular segments. Likewise, an effect ofradiocontrast media to increase tubular ﬂuid viscosity maybe diminished by intravascular volume expansion.
465It is
important to note that these potentially attenuating effects ofvolume expansion are speculative, and the precise mechan-isms by which volume expansion protects against CI-AKI
remain unknown.
4.4.1: We recommend i.v. volume expansion with either
isotonic sodium chloride or sodium bicarbonate
solutions, rather than no i.v. volume expansion, inpatients at increased risk for CI-AKI. ( 1A)
RATIONALE
Despite the recognition of volume depletion as an importantrisk factor for AKI, there are no RCTs that have directlyevaluated the role of ﬂuids vs. placebo in the prevention ofAKI. However, RCTs have compared different ﬂuids and have
combined ﬂuids with other interventions.
191Furthermore,
comparisons between outcomes seen in these trials191and
historical untreated control subjects466suggest a large beneﬁt
from ﬂuids. In particular, volume expansion and treatment of
dehydration are well-established interventions in the preven-tion of CI-AKI. A recent propensity analysis, however, notedthat strategies to prevent CI-AKI are implemented rathernonuniformly.
467Pre– and post–contrast-media administra-
tion i.v. ﬂuids were given to only 264 of 660 study patients(40.0%), more commonly with coronary angiography thanwith CT (91.2% vs. 16.6%). Other preventive measures, suchas administration of NAC or discontinuation of NSAIDs,were equally rarely applied. Only 39.2% of patients receivedNAC, while only 6.8% of patients were instructed todiscontinue NSAIDs. In a propensity analysis, the use ofi.v. ﬂuids was associated with a reduced rate of CI-AKI. Theincidence of CI-AKI was lowest following CT (range,0.0–10.9%) and was highest following noncoronary angio-graphy (range, 1.9–34.0%).
The ﬂuids that have been tested in the prevention of
CI-AKI are hypotonic saline (0.45%), isotonic saline (0.9%)and isotonic sodium bicarbonate. The interpretation of allthese studies is hampered by the fact that not all other risk
factors (susceptibilities) for CI-AKI were excluded or
considered in every study (i.e., age of the patient, presenceof CKD and/or diabetes prior to contrast-media administra-tion, type and dose of contrast agent, associated therapy withNAC, and other risk factors [see Chapter 2.2]).
There is no clear evidence from the literature to guide the
choice of the optimal rate and duration of ﬂuid infusion inCI-AKI prevention, but most studies suggest that the ﬂuids
should be started at least 1 h before and continued for 3–6
hours after contrast-media administration. A ‘‘good’’ urineoutput ( 4150 ml/h) in the 6 hours after the radiological
procedure has been associated with reduced rates of AKI inone study.
468Since not all of i.v. administered isotonic
crystalloid remains in the vascular space, in order to achievea urine ﬂow rate of at least 150 ml/h, X1.0–1.5 ml/kg/h of
i.v. ﬂuid has to be administered for 3–12 hours before and
6–12 hours after contrast-media exposure.
Mueller et al .
469found that i.v. 0.9% saline solution,
compared to 0.45% saline solution in dextrose, in 1620
patients undergoing coronary angiography signiﬁcantlyreduced CI-AKI. The sustained administration of isotonicsaline before and after radiocontrast injection seems, thus,to be more protective than equivalent volumes of hypotonicsaline.
464Although the mechanism by which sodium
bicarbonate, beyond its volume-expanding effects, mightfurther reduce CI-AKI remains poorly deﬁned, it has beenpostulated that sodium bicarbonate infusion may decreasegeneration of free radicals mediated by the Haber-Weissreaction by increasing tubular pH. The Haber-Weiss reactionis most active at lower pH levels.
470Sodium bicarbonate
infusion may also scavenge the potent oxidant peroxynitrate,produced via a nitric oxide–mediated pathway.
471Reactive
oxygen species activate cytokine-induced inﬂammatorymediators, resulting in damage to proximal tubular cells,
472
and it is likely that the activation of these mediators isinﬂuenced by tissue hypoxia and intracellular medullaryacidosis.
473
It is worth noting that, compared to i.v. bicarbonate, the
combination of oral azetazolamide inducing an alkalineurine, plus i.v. saline, was more effective for the prevention ofhttp://www.kidney-international.org chapter 4.4
&2012 KDIGO
80 Kidney International Supplements (2012) 2, 69–88
CI-AKI than saline alone, in a relatively small study in
children with stable chronic renal failure (CRF).474It could
also be hypothesized that sodium bicarbonate has a strongerimpact in lowering the intratubular viscosity caused by thecontrast medium, compared to isotonic saline, because itcauses less tubular sodium reabsorption than saline.
Sodium bicarbonate solutions have been tested in the
prevention of CI-AKI in comparison with isotonic saline,either with or without NAC. A number of systematic reviewson the role of sodium bicarbonate compared to isotonicsaline in the prevention of CI-AKI are available.
475–481
The most recent and probably the most complete
systematic review481analyzed MEDLINE, PubMed, EMBASE,
and the Cochrane Central Register of Controlled Trials from1950 to December 2008; conference proceedings; and
ClinicalTrials.gov, without language restriction (Figure 15).
This systematic review included RCTs of i.v. sodiumbicarbonate that prespeciﬁed the outcome of CI-AKI as a25% increase in baseline SCr concentration or an absoluteincrease of 0.5 mg/dl (44.2 mmol/l) after contrast-media
administration. Twenty-three published and unpublishedtrials with information on 3563 patients and 396 CI-AKIevents were included. The pooled RR was 0.62 (95% CI
0.45–0.86), with evidence of signiﬁcant heterogeneity acrossstudies. Some heterogeneity was due to the difference in the
estimates between published and unpublished studies: RR0.43 (95% CI 0.25–0.75) vs. 0.78 (95% CI 0.52–1.17),respectively. Meta-regression showed that small, poor-qualitystudies that assessed outcomes soon after contrast-mediaadministration were more likely to suggest the beneﬁt ofbicarbonate ( Po0.05 for all). No clear effects of treatment on
the risk for dialysis, heart failure, and total mortality wereidentiﬁed.
Suppl Tables 22 and 23 summarize the evidence from
RCTs where isotonic bicarbonate was compared to isotonicsaline alone, without concomitant other ‘‘preventive’’ inter-ventions. In all studies, a minimum of 50 patients in botharms and publication as full paper were required forinclusion in the tables. Only three studies directly compared
isotonic bicarbonate to isotonic saline.
470,482,483In a fourth
study by Brar et al.,484NAC was included in 47% and 46% of
the patients in both arms of the study (bicarbonate vs.
saline), respectively. The ﬁrst study was a small single-centerRCT
470enrolling 119 patients with stable SCr of at least
1.1 mg/dl (97.2 mmol/l), randomized to either infusion of
isotonic saline or isotonic sodium bicarbonate before andafter contrast-media administration. CI-AKI (deﬁned as an
increase of 25% in SCr from baseline within 48 hours)
Figure 15 |Bicarbonate vs. saline and risk of CI-AKI. Reprinted from Zoungas S, Ninomiya T, Huxley R et al . Systematic review: sodium
bicarbonate treatment regimens for the prevention of contrast-induced nephropathy. Ann Intern Med 2009; 151: 631– 638 with permission
from American College of Physicians481; accessed http://www.annals.org/content/151/9/631.full
Kidney International Supplements (2012) 2, 69–88 81chapter 4.4
developed in 1.7% in the bicarbonate group, compared to
13.6% in the saline solution group.
Ozcan et al .483included three prophylactic regimens:
infusion of sodium bicarbonate, sodium chloride, and sodiumchloride plus oral NAC (600 mg b.i.d.). The incidence ofCI-AKI, deﬁned as an increase in SCr level 425% or 0.5 mg/dl
(44.2mmol/l) after 48 hours was signiﬁcantly lower in the
sodium bicarbonate group (4.5%) compared to sodium
chloride alone (13.6%, P¼0.036). After adjusting for the
Mehran nephropathy risk score, the risk of CI-AKI signiﬁ-
cantly reduced with sodium bicarbonate compared to sodiumchloride alone (adjusted risk ratio 0.29; P¼0.043).
By contrast, Adolph et al.
482did not ﬁnd differences in CI-
AKI between the two ﬂuid regimens on day 1 afterangiography; even on day 2, most parameters were similarin both groups. In none of the above-mentioned studies was
there need for RRT.
Finally, a recent but retrospective study
485deﬁned CI-AKI
as an increase in SCr X25% within 48 hours of receiving
contrast media, and compared sodium bicarbonate to
normal saline in patients exposed to cardiac angiography.One group of patients (n ¼89) received prophylactic
bicarbonate; a second group, normal saline (n ¼98). The
patients in the bicarbonate group had more severe renal
disease with higher baseline SCr (1.58 ±0.5 mg/dl; 140 ±
44.2mmol/l) vs. (1.28 ±0.3 mg/dl; 113 ±26.5mmol/l),
P¼0.001 and a lower eGFR, compared to the normal saline
group. After contrast-media exposure, there was signiﬁcant
drop in eGFR (6.4%) and increase in SCr (11.3%) in thenormal saline group and no signiﬁcant change in thebicarbonate group. Three patients (3.4%) in the bicarbonategroup, as opposed to 14 patients (14.3%) in the normal saline
group, developed CI-AKI ( P¼0.011). Two patients in the
normal saline group and none in the bicarbonate group
needed dialysis. This study suggests that the use of i.v.sodium bicarbonate is more effective than normal saline inpreventing CI-AKI.
Three studies compared bicarbonate and saline solutions
associated with the administration of NAC in both studyarms.
486–488Recio-Mayoral et al.488conducted a prospective
single-center RCT in 111 consecutive patients with acutecoronary syndrome undergoing emergency angioplasty. Onegroup of patients received an infusion of sodium bicarbonateplus NAC started just before contrast-media injection andcontinued for 12 hours after angioplasty. The second(control) group received the standard ﬂuid protocol consist-ing of i.v. isotonic saline for 12 hours after angioplasty. Inboth groups, two doses of oral NAC were administered the
next day. A SCr concentration 40.5 mg/dl ( 444.2mmol/l)
from baseline after emergency angioplasty was observed in
1.8% in the bicarbonate group and in 21.8% of the salinegroup. Mortality and need for RRT were not signiﬁcantlydifferent between both groups. Briguori et al.
486randomized
326 CKD patients (SCr X2 mg/dl [ X177mmol/l] and/or
eGFRo40 ml/min per 1.73 m2), and referred for coronary
and/or peripheral procedures to three different protocols:prophylactic administration of 0.9% saline infusion plusNAC (n ¼111), sodium bicarbonate infusion plus NAC
(n¼108), and 0.9% saline plus ascorbic acid plus NAC
(n¼107). CI-AKI was deﬁned as an increase of X25% in the
SCr concentration 48 hours after the procedure. CI-AKIoccurred in 9.9% of the saline plus NAC group, in 1.9% ofthe bicarbonate/NAC group ( P¼0.019 vs. saline plus NAC
group), and in 10.3% of the saline plus ascorbic acid plus
NAC group (P ¼1.00 vs. saline plus NAC group). There was
no difference in mortality nor in need for RRT among the
different groups. While these two studies suggest thatisotonic bicarbonate may provide greater beneﬁt thanisotonic saline, either in association with NAC or not, neitherstudy can be considered conclusive.
Maioli et al .
487prospectively compared the efﬁcacy of
sodium bicarbonate vs. isotonic saline in addition to NAC in
a larger population of 502 patients with an estimated CrCl
o60 ml/min, and undergoing coronary angiography orintervention. CI-AKI was deﬁned as an absolute increase ofSCrX0.5 mg/dl ( X44.2mmol/l) measured within 5 days. CI-
AKI occurred in 10.8%; 10% were treated with sodiumbicarbonate and 11.5% with saline. In patients with CI-AKI,the mean increase in creatinine was not signiﬁcantly differentin the two study groups. Based on this last prospective study,
bicarbonate does not seem to be more efﬁcient than saline.
Furthermore, a retrospective cohort study at the Mayo Clinicassessed the risk of CI-AKI associated with the use of sodiumbicarbonate, NAC, or the combination. Surprisingly, i.v.sodium bicarbonate was associated with an increasedincidence of CI-AKI.
489
While one might take the position that, if in doubt, one
should choose the regimen that is potentially superior, the
Work Group also considered the potential harm. In addition,
isotonic bicarbonate solutions are usually composed byadding 154 ml of 8.4% sodium bicarbonate (i.e., 1 mmol/ml) to 846 ml of 5% glucose solution, resulting in a ﬁnalsodium and bicarbonate concentration of 154 mmol/l each.Since this mixing of the solution is often done at the bedsideor in the hospital pharmacy, there is the possibility for errorsleading to the infusion of a hypertonic bicarbonate solution.
The potential for harm from dosing errors, and the added
burden from preparation of the bicarbonate solution, has tobe taken into account in clinical practice when making achoice between using bicarbonate rather than standardisotonic saline solutions. Taken together, the Work Groupconcluded that there is a possible but inconsistent beneﬁt ofbicarbonate solutions based on overall moderate-qualityevidence (Suppl Table 22). As discussed above, the potential
of harm and the additional burden for preparing the
bicarbonate solutions led the Work Group not to express apreference for or against one solution (isotonic saline orisotonic bicarbonate). Thus, either can be used for theprevention of CI-AKI.
4.4.2: We recommend not using oral ﬂuids alone in
patients at increased risk of CI-AKI. ( 1C)
82 Kidney International Supplements (2012) 2, 69–88chapter 4.4
RATIONALE
Oral volume expansion may have some beneﬁt, but there is
not enough evidence to show that it is as effective as i.v.volume expansion.
490One small RCT of 53 patients491who
underwent nonemergent cardiac catheterization found thati.v. volume expansion with saline was more effective thanunrestricted oral ﬂuid intake. A more recent trial
492examined
the effects of oral volume intake on renal function in 180
patients with preserved renal function referred for coronary
CT angiography. The patients were divided into two groups:106 subjects with an increase in SCr after coronary CTangiography; and 74 without. Signiﬁcant correlations wereobserved between the amount of oral ﬂuid intake and thepercentage changes in SCr as well as the absolute changes ineGFR. In multiple regression analysis, the amount of oralﬂuid intake was the only independent predictor for an
increase in SCr. However, a recent study compared oral ﬂuids
(water with or without bicarbonate) to i.v. ﬂuids (isotonicsaline or bicarbonate) and did not ﬁnd differences inincidence of CI-AKI patients with mild CKD. If conﬁrmedin larger studies, this regimen could offer an equivalent andmore practical approach in preventing a decline in renalfunction after contrast exposure, without accruing additionaldelay in hospital days or in-hospital mortality.
493
ROLE OF NAC IN THE PREVENTION OF CI-AKI
4.4.3: We suggest using oral NAC, together with i.v. iso-
tonic crystalloids, in patients at increased risk ofCI-AKI. ( 2D)
RATIONALE
NAC—in many, but not all, studies—has been shown to havea protective effect on CI-AKI when administered before theonset of renal insult; for a review, see McCullough.
494In
addition, NAC is inexpensive and appears to be safe,
although it may have some detrimental effects on myocardial
and coagulation function.371–373The ‘‘safety’’ of NAC should
further be amended, particularly when high i.v. doses areused, as in some of the RCTs in CI-AKI. When prospectivelystudied in acetaminophen poisoning, i.v. NAC producedanaphylactoid reactions in up to 48% of participants.
374
Although most of these reactions were mild, at least onedeath has been reported in a patient with asthma.
375It should
be noted that the doses used in acetaminophen intoxicationare still much higher than in the ‘‘high doses’’ used in CI-AKIprevention trials. In a recent review,
495doses of NAC 300 mg/
kg i.v. over 21 hours, 980 mg/kg i.v. over 48 hours, and1330 mg/kg p.o. over 72 hours were mentioned to have beenall comparably effective at preventing hepatotoxicity in mostuncomplicated early-presenting acute acetaminophen over-doses. Although a variety of doses of NAC has been
administered in the prevention of CI-AKI, the i.v. ‘‘high
doses’’ used in one study
496are mostly 2 /C21200 mg NAC per
day for 2–3 days, far below the doses used in acetaminophenintoxication. A meta-analysis497of studies using high doses
of NAC deﬁned the latter as a daily dose greater than 1200 mgor a single periprocedural dose greater than 600 mg(periprocedural being described as immediately or within 4hours of the planned contrast exposure). It should also beremembered that no FDA label is available for NAC as apreventive drug of AKI.
Suppl Tables 24 and 25 summarize the quite numerous
RCTs where NAC has been compared to placebo on theimpact of patient mortality, need for RRT, or prevention ofCI-AKI. In most of the studies, i.v. ﬂuids, either with isotonicsaline or with isotonic bicarbonate, was used in both arms.Moreover, the impact of NAC on important ‘‘hard’’ patientoutcomes, such as all-cause mortality, need for RRT, ordoubling of SCr level has only rarely been studied. At present,there is no current evidence that either oral or i.v. NAC can
alter mortality or need for RRT after contrast-media
administration to patients at risk for CI-AKI. The only studyshowing a signiﬁcant decrease in hospital mortality is thethree-arm study of Marenzi et al.
498in patients undergoing
primary angioplasty. Overall in-hospital mortality was higherin patients with CI-AKI, deﬁned as a 25% increase in SCr,than in those without CI-AKI (26 % vs. 1 %; Po0.001).
Thirteen patients (11%) in the control group died, as did ﬁve
(4%) in the standard-dose NAC and three (3%) in the high-
dose NAC group ( P¼0.02). All other studies did not show a
beneﬁcial effect on mortality (Suppl Table 25). Overall, thisevidence was deemed to be of moderate quality and thepossible positive effect on mortality dubious.
The effect of NAC on the incidence of CI-AKI is quite
variable. As is shown in the evidence proﬁle (Suppl Table 24),the evidence that NAC reduces CI-AKI, as deﬁned in the
different trials, comes from studies with rather heterogeneous
results; most of the studies were of either high or modestquality. In one study, a protective—even dose-dependent—effect was observed.
498In that study, the risk for CI-AKI was
reduced by 54.5% in the standard-dose NAC group and by75.8% in the high-dose NAC group. These ﬁndings are insharp contrast to many other studies showing no effect and,in particular, with the large study of Webb et al.,
499which was
terminated early after enrollment of 487 patients becauseof a determination of futility by the Data Safety MonitoringCommittee. As mentioned earlier, combination studies ofNAC with bicarbonate administration
486have found a
moderate beneﬁt for this combination, compared to thecombination of NAC-saline.
As recently remarked by Fishbane,
364most of the studies
published on NAC for the prevention of CI-AKI are quite
small in size, and meta-analyses have been performed to
increase the probability of explaining the full spectrum ofutility for NAC. To date, seven out of the 11 meta-analysesthat have been published on this subject found a net beneﬁtfor NAC in the prevention of CI-AKI.
364However, as pointed
out before, marked heterogeneity in the studies, andpublication bias must lead to the conclusion that ‘‘poolingof data to arrive at a summary estimate for treatment efﬁcacy
Kidney International Supplements (2012) 2, 69–88 83chapter 4.4
should generally be avoided in situations where the trials
exhibit signiﬁcant statistical and/or clinical hetero-geneity’’ .
500,501A recent prospective RCT502was performed in
patients with decreased kidney function (CrCl p60 ml/min
and/or SCr level of X1.1 mg/dl [ X97.2mmol/l]), comparing a
high oral dose of NAC with high doses of vitamin C. Allpatients underwent a coronary angiography. The primary end-point was the maximum increase of SCr level, and the
secondary end-point was the incidence of CI-AKI, deﬁned as a
relative increase in baseline SCr level of X25% and/or an
absolute increase of X0.5 mg/dl ( X44.2mmol/l) within 48
hours after contrast-media administration. The maximumincrease of SCr level was signiﬁcantly lower in the NAC groupt h a ni nt h ea s c o r b i ca c i dg r o u p( /C00.03±0.18 mg/dl [ /C02.65±
15.9mmol/l] vs. 0.04 ±0.20 mg/dl [3.54 ±17.7mmol/l]),
respectively ( P¼0.026). The incidence of CI-AKI tended to
be in favor of NAC rather than ascorbic acid, 1.2% vs. 4.4%,respectively, although this difference was not signiﬁcant(P¼0.370). It was concluded that an oral high dose of NAC
seemed to be more beneﬁcial than ascorbic acid in preventingCI-AKI, particularly in diabetic patients with pre-existing CKD.
Finally, a randomized, single-blind, controlled trial was
recently published to assess NAC effects on CI-AKI andreperfusion injury in ST-segment elevation myocardial
infarction (MI) patients undergoing primary angioplasty
with moderate contrast-media volumes (between 120–230 mlof an iso-osmolar contrast medium).
496The patients under-
going primary angioplasty were randomized to either high-dose NAC (two times 1200 mg/d for 48 hours; or placeboplus ﬂuids). CI-AKI occurred in 14% of the NAC group andin 20% of the placebo group ( P¼0.28). The myocardial
salvage index was also not different between both treatment
groups. Activated oxygen protein products and oxidized low-
density lipoprotein as markers for oxidative stress werereduced by as much as 20% in the NAC group, whereas nochange was evident in the placebo group.
Thus, despite high-dose i.v. NAC reducing oxidative stress,
it does not provide an additional clinical beneﬁt, comparedto placebo, with respect to CI-AKI and myocardial reper-fusion injury in nonselected patients undergoing angioplasty.
A recent meta-analysis of all prospective trials of individuals
randomized to either orally or i.v. administered high doses ofNAC, deﬁned as a daily dose greater than 1200 mg or a singleperiprocedural dose (within 4 hours of contrast-mediaexposure) 4600 mg, was published by Trivedi et al.
497The
overall effect size, assuming a common OR, was 0.46 (95% CI0.33–0.63) for the occurrence of CI-AKI with the use of high-dose NAC. The results of the more conservative random-
effects approach were similar (OR 0.52; 95% CI 0.34–0.78).
Another recently published meta-analysis of RCTs inclu-
ded published trials and conference abstracts (Figure 16).
503
The primary and secondary outcomes of interest were
CI-AKI, and renal failure requiring dialysis, respectively.Ten RCTs met the inclusion criteria. Nine studies comparedcombination treatment (bicarbonate and NAC) to NAC andnormal saline; one study compared combination therapy toNAC alone; one study compared combination therapy toNAC with normal saline, and a separate arm with NAC andascorbic acid. Collectively, combination treatment of NACwith i.v. sodium bicarbonate reduced CI-AKI by 35%compared to the other above-mentioned combinations (RR0.65; 95% CI 0.40–1.05). However, the combination of NACplus sodium bicarbonate did not signiﬁcantly reduce renalfailure requiring dialysis (RR 0.47; 95% CI 0.16–1.41). It was
concluded that combination prophylaxis with NAC and
sodium bicarbonate substantially reduced the occurrenceof CI-AKI overall, but not dialysis-dependent renal failure.This paper suggests that combination prophylaxis shouldbe incorporated for all high-risk patients (emergent casesor patients with pre-existing CKD). Most of the studiesadministered NAC orally; some studies used the i.v. route oreven a combination of oral and i.v. There was also a substantial
variation in doses and timing of NAC administration.
One additional study was recently published and was thus
not included in the meta-analysis discussed above. Koc
et al.,
504investigated the efﬁcacy of prophylactic i.v. NAC and
ﬂuids for the prevention of CI-AKI in patients with mild tomoderate renal dysfunction (SCr X1.1 mg/dl [ X97.2mmol/l]
or a CrCl p60 ml/min) who were undergoing coronary
angiography. A group of patients was assigned to i.v. NAC
(bolus of 600 mg twice daily before and on the day of the
procedure) plus high-dose normal saline, a second group toonly high-dose saline, and a third (control) group receivedstandard saline. Patients in the NAC plus high-dose salinegroup received an i.v. bolus of 600 mg of NAC twice dailybefore and on the day of the coronary procedure (total 2.4 g)plus i.v. 0.9% saline 1 ml/kg/h before, on, and after the day ofthe coronary procedure. Patients in the high-dose arm
received the same amount of isotonic saline, while patients
in the control group received an i.v. dose of 0.9% saline1 ml/kg/h for 12 hours before and 12 hours after the coronaryprocedure. The rate of CI-AKI in the NAC plus high-dosesaline group was lower than in the high-dose saline groupwithout NAC. No signiﬁcant differences in the primary andsecondary end-points were found between the high-dosesaline and control groups.
In conclusion, based on the evidence tables and even
taking the last recent study into account, the overall beneﬁt ofNAC is not consistent or overwhelming. On the other hand,oral NAC has a low risk of adverse events and usually a lowcost.
THEOPHYLLINE AND FENOLDOPAM IN PREVENTION OF CI-AKI
Theophylline
4.4.4: We suggest not using theophylline to prevent
CI-AKI. ( 2C)
RATIONALE
A rationale for the prophylactic use of adenosine antago-
nists in patients undergoing radiocontrast procedures was
84 Kidney International Supplements (2012) 2, 69–88chapter 4.4
suggested by results showing increased serum levels and
urinary excretion of adenosine occurring after intravascularadministration of contrast media.
505The efﬁcacy of theo-
phylline in preventing CI-AKI has been addressed by asystematic review and meta-analysis in 2005 (nine RCTs, 585patients),
506and another meta-analysis in 2008 (six RCTs,
629 patients).432Both meta-analyses indicated a nonsigni-
ﬁcant trend toward a renoprotective effect of theophyllineprophylaxis. The incidence of CI-AKI tended to belower (Bagshaw: OR 0.4, CI 0.14–1.16, P¼0.09; Kelly: OR
0.49, CI 0.23–1.06, P¼0.14), SCr concentrations 48 hours
after intervention were signiﬁcantly lower ( /C00.17 mg/dl;
95% CI /C00.2 to /C00.06 mg/dl [ /C015.0mmol/l, CI /C017.7 to
/C05.30mmol/l]; P¼0.002) with theophylline compared to
control therapies. However, the overall beneﬁt was small andﬁndings were inconsistent across studies. The beneﬁtattributable to the use of theophylline tended to be lessmarked in patients receiving iso-osmolar, nonionic contrastmedia, and in patients undergoing a predeﬁned saline
protocol.Neither meta-analysis included a RCT published in 2006
in 150 contrast-media examinations in 91 patients, in which
the renoprotective effects of theophylline, NAC, and the
combination of both were directly compared.
507All patients
had at least one risk factor for developing CI-AKI, and
received more than 100 ml of low-osmolar radiocontrastagent. The incidence of CI-AKI was signiﬁcantly lower withtheophylline as compared to NAC pretreatment (2% vs. 12%;P¼0.045), and did not differ between theophylline mono-
therapy and the combination treatment. The renoprotectivesuperiority of theophylline, which was given as a single i.v.
200 mg dose 30 minutes prior to the procedure, was even
more signiﬁcant in patients with pre-existing renal damage asindicated by an SCr 41.5 mg/dl ( 4133mmol/l) ( P¼0.008).
Moreover, a recent study
508randomized 217 patients with
eGFR between 30 and 60 ml/min who were undergoingcoronary angiography to one of three prophylactic treat-ments: i.v. isotonic saline (1 ml/kg/h for 12 hours before andafter contrast media (group 1, n ¼72); isotonic saline as in
group 1 together with NAC (600 mg p.o. twice daily the
Figure 16 |NAC and bicarbonate vs. NAC for risk of CI-AKI. Reprinted from Brown, JR, Block CA, Malenka DJ et al . Sodium bicarbonate
plus N-acetylcysteine prophylaxis: a meta-analysis. JACC Cardiovasc Interv 2009; 2: 1116– 1124,503copyright 2009, with permission from
American College of Cardiology Foundation; accessed http://interventions.onlinejacc.org/cgi/content/full/2/11/1116
Kidney International Supplements (2012) 2, 69–88 85chapter 4.4
preceding day and the day of angiography (group 2, n ¼73);
or isotonic saline and NAC as in group 2 together with
200 mg theophylline orally twice daily for the preceding dayand the day of angiography (group 3, n ¼72). The incidence
of CI-AKI (0.5 mg/dl or 44.2 mmol/l SCr increase within 48
hours of intravascular contrast-media injection) was 6.9% ingroup 1, 9.6% in group 2, and 0% in group 3 ( Po0.03),
suggesting a beneﬁcial effect of adding theophylline to a
standard regimen in the prevention of CI-AKI. Notably, at
least in this study, NAC administration had no additiveprotective effect compared to isotonic saline alone.
A very recent study
509randomly assigned patients to
prophylactic administration of saline with sodium bicarbo-nate plus theophylline (either orally or i.v.) or sodiumbicarbonate only. Theophylline plus bicarbonate prophylaxissigniﬁcantly reduced the incidence of CI-AKI (1.6% vs. 7.9%;
P¼0.015) compared to bicarbonate alone. Theophylline was
administered either orally (200 mg b.i.d. starting the day
before the contrast administration and continuing for 24hours thereafter) or i.v. 200 mg in a short infusion beforecontrast administration and continuing orally at 200 mgb.i.d. for 48 hours. Theophylline prophylaxis signiﬁcantlyreduced the incidence of CI-AKI in moderate and high-riskpatients (0% vs. 8.8%; P¼0.022 and 9.1% vs. 42.1%;
P¼0.014, respectively). This study did not mention side-
effects of theophylline.
Although these data suggest that preinterventional theo-
phylline administration might be helpful in patients atincreased risk for CI-AKI, the possibility of cardiovascularside-effects and the interactions with numerous drugsassociated with theophylline
510,511should be recognized
(Suppl Tables 26 and 27). As can be noted from the evidence
proﬁle tables, the evidence is low and the balance of beneﬁts
vs. harm is uncertain. In view of the low evidence and theuncertain balance of beneﬁts vs. harm, the Work Groupdoes not support the use of theophylline for prevention ofCI-AKI.
Fenoldopam
4.4.5: We recommend not using fenoldopam to prevent
CI-AKI. ( 1B)
RATIONALE
Fenoldopam is a selective dopamine A1 receptor agonistthat might theoretically increase blood ﬂow, especially to therenal medulla. Several uncontrolled studies (historicalcontrols, retrospective review) suggested that it is effectivein reducing the risk for contrast-induced nephropathy, andthe results of a pilot trial were promising (for review, seeStacul et al.
512).However, two prospective randomized trials
showed negative results.220,513In the ﬁrst trial,513patientswere randomized to saline alone or with fenoldopam(0.1mg/kg per minute for 4 hours before and after the
procedure); a third arm was treated with NAC. The incidenceof CI-AKI was similar in the fenoldopam (15.7%) andcontrol (15.3%) groups, and there was no beneﬁt oversaline alone. A second, larger trial
220also conﬁrmed the
lack of beneﬁt with fenoldopam. In this double-blind trialof 315 patients, all with saline 0.45%, were randomized to
fenoldopam (0.05 mg/kg per minute titrated to 0.1 mg/kg
per minute) or placebo starting 1 h before the procedure and
continuing for 12 hours afterward. There was no signiﬁcantdifference in the incidence of CI-AKI within 96 hours inthe two groups (fenoldopam, 33.6%; placebo, 30.1%) or inthe rates of dialysis, rehospitalization, or death at 30 days.
Statins in the prevention of CI-AKI
Two recent studies examined the use of statins in theprevention of CI-AKI patients with CKD. In the ﬁrst study,
514
31 patients were prospectively randomized to receive atorvas-
tatin 80 mg/d or placebo for 48 hours before and 48 hours
after contrast-medium administration. All patients received i.v.saline and oral NAC. CI-AKI occurred in 16 patients (11%) inthe placebo group and 15 patients (10%) in the atorvastatingroup. Persistent kidney injury, deﬁned as 1-month increasefrom baseline creatinine value 425%, was observed in 30%
in the placebo group and in 31% in the atorvastatin group.The second study
515followed 431 patients, 194 of whom were
receiving pravastatin treatment for hypercholesterolemia. SCrlevels were measured at baseline (preprocedure) and within 48hours after contrast-medium exposure (peak postprocedure).Logistic regression analysis revealed that pravastatin treatment,preprocedure SCr, and contrast volume were independentlyrelated to the decreased risk of CI-AKI. However, such studiesare susceptible to the so-called ‘‘healthy user effect’’ wherecertain groups may have reduced risk, not because of the
drug but because of healthier lifestyles, for which use of the
medication is a marker. For example, patients taking statinsmay also be more compliant with other medical-care regimensthat may reduce adverse events.
SUPPLEMENTARY MATERIAL
Supplementary Table 22: Evidence profile of RCTs examining effect of
i.v. sodium bicarbonate vs. control for the prevention of CI-AKI.
Supplementary Table 23: Summary table of RCTs examining the effect
of i.v. sodium bicarbonate on the prevention of CI-AKI.Supplementary Table 24: Evidence profile of RCTs examining the effect
of NAC vs. placebo on the prevention of CI-AKI.
Supplementary Table 25: Summary table of RCTs examining the effect
of NAC vs. placebo on the prevention of CI-AKI.
Supplementary Table 26: Evidence profile of RCTs examining the effect
of theophylline vs. placebo on the prevention of CI-AKI.
Supplementary Table 27: Summary table of RCTs examining the effect
of theophylline vs. placebo on the prevention of CI-AKI.
Supplementary material is linked to the online version of the paper at
http://www.kdigo.org/clinical_practice_guidelines/AKI.php
86 Kidney International Supplements (2012) 2, 69–88chapter 4.4
Chapter 4.5: Effects of hemodialysis or hemofiltration
4.5.1: We suggest not using prophylactic intermittent
hemodialysis (IHD) or hemoﬁltration (HF) for
contrast-media removal in patients at increasedrisk for CI-AKI. ( 2C)
RATIONALE
Contrast media are excreted mainly by glomerular ﬁltrationand there is a signiﬁcant correlation between both total body
and renal clearances of contrast media and GFR; the renal
excretion of contrast media will thus be delayed in patientswith renal failure (for review, see Deray).
516Contrast media
can be efﬁciently removed from blood by IHD and a singlesession effectively removes 60–90% of contrast media.
516,517
On the basis of these observations, several studies haveexplored the prophylactic value of IHD in patients at highrisk, but most of these studies have not demonstrated a
reduced incidence of CI-AKI.
516,518For example, Vogt
et al.518recorded renal function and other parameters, IHD
requirements, and relevant clinical events before and during 6
days after administration of contrast media in 113 patientswith a baseline SCr 42.3 mg/dl ( 4203mmol/l). Eight out of
55 patients in the prophylactic IHD group and three in thenon-IHD group ( P¼0.12), required IHD after contrast-
media examination. Reinecke et al.
519performed a prospec-
tive single-center trial in 424 consecutive patients withSCr concentrations between 1.3–3.5 mg/dl (115–309 mmol/l)
who underwent elective coronary angiography. Patients wererandomized to one of three treatment strategies with allpatients receiving pre- and postprocedural ﬂuids: one groupreceived no additional therapy, patients in the second groupwere hemodialyzed once, and the third group received oralNAC. The frequency of CI-AKI (deﬁned as an increase in SCr
X0.5 mg/dl or X44.2mmol/l) from 48 to 72 hours after
catheterization was 6.1% in the ﬂuids-only group, 15.9% with
IHD treatment, and 5.3% in the NAC group (intention-to-treat analysis; P¼0.008). There were no differences
between the treatment groups with regard to increased SCrX0.5 mg/dl ( X44.2mmol/l) after 30– 60 days (4.8%, 5.1%, and
3.1%, respectively; P¼0.700). Analyses of long-term follow-
up (range 63– 1316 days) by Cox regressions models of the
study groups found quite similar survival rates ( P¼0.500).
This large study concluded that IHD, in addition to ﬂuids, for
the prevention of CI-AKI provided no evidence for anyoutcome beneﬁt but showed evidence for probable harm.
A retrospective but important cohort study of 391 patients
(age 69±8 years, with chronic renal insufﬁciency [SCr
X1.3 mg/dl; X115mmol/l]) who underwent cardiac cathe-
terization, also did not ﬁnd any beneﬁcial preventive effect.
520By contrast, Lee et al .521presented a prospective RCT
indicating that prophylactic IHD might be useful in patientsscheduled for coronary angiography or coronary interventionwith severely impaired renal function (baseline CrCl of 13 ml/min per 1.73 m
2). Patients were treated with normal saline at
1 ml/kg/h for 6 hours before and 12 hours after contrast-media administration and randomized to receive IHD for4 hours as soon as possible after angiography or controltreatment. Four days after angiography, SCr concentrations
were lower in the IHD group compared to the control group.
Out of 42 patients, one patient (2%) in the IHD group but 14(35%) out of 40 patients in the control group requiredtemporary IHD after coronary angiography. Furthermore,none of the 42 patients in the IHD group, but ﬁve (13%) outof 40 patients in the control group, required maintenanceIHD after discharge from the hospital ( Po0.05).
A recent meta-analysis of studies using periprocedural
extracorporeal blood puriﬁcation techniques
517concluded
that such treatments did not decrease the incidence ofCI-AKI. It could theoretically be anticipated that high-ﬂuxmembranes used in HF or hemodiaﬁltration (HDF) moda-lities should be able to remove contrast media moreefﬁciently than low-ﬂux membranes used in routine IHD.However, recent publications on this topic have added to thecontroversy about the role of IHD or HF to prevent CI-AKI
(Suppl Tables 28 and 29). Marenzi et al .
522studied 114
consecutive patients with CRF (SCr concentration 42 mg/dl
or4177mmol/l) who were undergoing coronary interven-
tions. Fifty-eight patients were assigned to either HF starting
before the contrast-medium administration and continuingfor up to 24 hours after, while 56 patients were treated withisotonic saline at a rate of 1 ml per kilogram of body weightper hour, given in a step-down unit over the same time
interval. In-hospital mortality was 2% in the HF group and
14% in the control group ( P¼0.02), and the cumulative
1-year mortality was 10% and 30%, respectively ( P¼0.01).
Temporary RRT was required in 25% of the control groupand in only 3% of the patients in the HF group. An increasein the SCr concentration of 425% from the baseline value
after the coronary intervention occurred less frequentlyamong patients in the HF group than among the control
patients (5% vs. 50%, Po0.001). The effective removal of
creatinine during HF or IHD makes it difﬁcult to be certain
that an observed lower incidence of CI-AKI is not related tothe transport removal of creatinine during the procedure.
In a subsequent study, the same authors
523randomized
92 patients with CKD (CrCl p30 ml/min) to three different
prophylactic treatments: i.v. isotonic saline (control group);i.v. saline for 12 hours before contrast-media exposure,http://www.kidney-international.org chapter 4.5
&2012 KDIGO
Kidney International Supplements (2012) 2, 69–88 87
followed by HF for 18–24 hours after contrast-media
exposure; and a third group where HF was performed for 6hours before and for 18– 24 hours after contrast-mediaexposure. The incidence of CI-AKI ( 425% increase in
SCr) and the in-hospital clinical course were compared in thethree groups. In-hospital mortality was 20%, 10%, and 0%,respectively, in the three groups; IHD was required in nine(30%), 3 (10%), and zero (0%) patients, respectively
(P¼0.002). According to these results, pre-HF is required
to obtain the full clinical beneﬁt, suggesting that among
different mechanisms possibly involved, high-volume con-trolled volume expansion before contrast-media exposureplays a major role in prevention. This study further suggeststhat bicarbonate exposure with HF may ultimately have beenthe mechanism for the lower CI-AKI incidence (Suppl Table29). In summary, the evidence proﬁle for IHD vs. HF showed
low-quality evidence and an uncertain beneﬁt vs. harm
balance of HF/IHD in preventing CI-AKI in patients withsevere CKD. Given the costs and logistical difﬁculties, the useof HF modalities for CI-AKI prevention can only beadvocated if future studies will convincingly show clearbeneﬁt.
SPONSORSHIP
KDIGO gratefully acknowledges the following sponsors thatmake our initiatives possible: Abbott, Amgen, Belo Founda-tion, Coca-Cola Company, Dole Food Company, Genzyme,
Hoffmann-LaRoche, JC Penney, NATCO—The Organization
for Transplant Professionals, NKF—Board of Directors,Novartis, Robert and Jane Cizik Foundation, Shire,Transwestern Commercial Services, and Wyeth. KDIGO issupported by a consortium of sponsors and no funding isaccepted for the development of speciﬁc guidelines.
DISCLAIMER
While every effort is made by the publishers, editorialboard, and ISN to see that no inaccurate or misleading data,opinion or statement appears in this Journal, they wishto make it clear that the data and opinions appearing inthe articles and advertisements herein are the responsibility
of the contributor, copyright holder, or advertiser concerned.
Accordingly, the publishers and the ISN, the editorial boardand their respective employers, ofﬁce and agents acceptno liability whatsoever for the consequences of any suchinaccurate or misleading data, opinion or statement. Whileevery effort is made to ensure that drug doses and otherquantities are presented accurately, readers are advised thatnew methods and techniques involving drug usage, and
described within this Journal, should only be followed in
conjunction with the drug manufacturer’s own publishedliterature.
SUPPLEMENTARY MATERIAL
Supplementary Table 28: Evidence profile of RCTs examining the effect
of hemodialysis or hemofiltration on the prevention of CI-AKI.
Supplementary Table 29: Summary table of RCTs examining the effect
of hemodialysis or hemofiltration on the prevention of CI-AKI.
Supplementary material is linked to the online version of the paper at
http://www.kdigo.org/clinical_practice_guidelines/AKI.php
88 Kidney International Supplements (2012) 2, 69–88chapter 4.5
Section 5: Dialysis Interventions for Treatment of AKI
Kidney International Supplements (2012) 2,89– 115; doi:10.1038/kisup.2011.35
Chapter 5.1: Timing of renal replacement therapy
in AKI
Whether or not to provide RRT, and when to start, are two of
the fundamental questions facing nephrologists and inten-
sive-care practitioners in most cases of severe AKI. In recentpublications, the timing of initiation of RRT was listed as oneof the top priorities in research on AKI.
524However, this
dimension has not been included as a factor in any of thelarge RCTs in this area. The optimal timing of dialysis forAKI is not deﬁned. In current practice, the decision to startRRT is based most often on clinical features of volume
overload and biochemical features of solute imbalance
(azotemia, hyperkalemia, severe acidosis). However, in theabsence of these factors there is generally a tendency to avoiddialysis as long as possible, a thought process that reﬂects thedecisions made for patients with CKD Stage 5.
Clinicians tend to delay RRT when they suspect that
patients may recover on their own, and because of concernfor the well-known risks associated with the RRT procedure,
including hypotension, arrhythmia, membrane bioincom-
patibility, and complications of vascular access and anti-coagulant administration. There is also some concern thatRRT may compromise recovery of renal function, andincrease the progression of CKD.
525Whether these risks
outweigh the potential beneﬁts of earlier initiation of RRT isstill unclear.
5.1.1: Initiate RRT emergently when life-threatening
changes in ﬂuid, electrolyte, and acid-base balance
exist. ( Not Graded )
5.1.2: Consider the broader clinical context, the presence
of conditions that can be modiﬁed with RRT, andtrends of laboratory tests—rather than single BUNand creatinine thresholds alone—when making thedecision to start RRT. ( Not Graded )
RATIONALE
While no RCTs exist for dialysis for life-threateningindications, it is widely accepted that patients with severehyperkalemia, severe acidosis, pulmonary edema, and uremiccomplications should be dialyzed emergently. In the absence
of kidney function, and when therapeutic measures that
promote the intracellular shift of potassium (such ascorrection of acidosis with bicarbonate, glucose and insulininfusion, and beta-2 agonists) are exhausted, an excess of
potassium can only be eliminated with RRT. On the other
hand, when intermittent dialysis is used after thesetherapeutic interventions, the extracorporeal removal ofpotassium will be reduced and the post-treatment reboundof serum potassium will be more pronounced.
526
Metabolic acidosis is a frequent clinical problem in
patients with severe AKI. Although the discussion as towhen metabolic acidosis in critically ill patients should be
corrected is outside the scope of this guideline, metabolic
acidosis associated with AKI can usually be corrected withbicarbonate and should rarely require urgent dialysis if notaccompanied by volume overload or uremia.
527As the pH
and bicarbonate values to initiate dialysis for metabolicacidosis are not supported by evidence, no standard criteriafor initiating dialysis for acidosis exist. A variety of poisons,drug overdoses, and toxic compounds (e.g., salicylates,
ethylene glycol, methanol, metformin) can contribute to
acid-base problems and also lead to AKI. In these circum-stances, RRT may also facilitate removal of the offendingdrug.
528–530
Only one RCT has evaluated the effect of timing of
initiation of RRT on outcome. Bouman et al.531randomized
106 critically ill patients with AKI to early vs. late initiationof RRT. The early initiation group started RRT within
12 hours of oliguria ( o30 ml/h for 6 hours, not respond-
ing to diuretics or hemodynamic optimization), or CrCl
o20 ml/min. The late-initiation group started RRT whenclassic indications were met. The study did not ﬁnddifferences in ICU or hospital mortality, or in renal recoveryamong survivors, but was clearly too small to allow fordeﬁnitive conclusions (Suppl Table 30).
The remaining data come from observational studies. The
association of early initiation of dialysis with survival beneﬁtwas ﬁrst suggested by case series with historical controlsconducted in the 1960 s and 1970 s.
532–535In these studies,
levels of blood urea or BUN were used to distinguish early vs.late start of dialysis. However, these studies mostly combinedearly start with more-intensive dialysis and late start withless-intensive dialysis. More recent studies have continued thetrend focusing on BUN as a biomarker for starting RRT.
Single-center observational studies that were restricted to
AKI after trauma
536and coronary artery bypass surgery537,538http://www.kidney-international.org chapter 5.1
&2012 KDIGO
Kidney International Supplements (2012) 2, 89–115 89
suggested a beneﬁt to RRT initiation at lower BUN concen-
trations. A prospective multicenter observational cohortstudy performed by the Program to Improve Care in AcuteRenal Disease (PICARD) analyzed dialysis initiation—asinferred by BUN concentration—in 243 patients from ﬁvegeographically and ethnically diverse clinical sites. Adjustingfor age, hepatic failure, sepsis, thrombocytopenia, and SCr,and stratiﬁed by site and initial dialysis modality, initiation of
RRT at higher BUN (4 76 mg/dl [blood urea 427.1 mmol/l])
was associated with an increased risk of death (RR 1.85; 95%
CI 1.16–2.96).
539In a prospective multicenter observational
study conducted at 54 ICUs in 23 countries, timing of RRTwas stratiﬁed into ‘‘early’’ or ‘‘late’’ by median urea at thetime RRT started (24.2 mmol/l [BUN 67.8 mg/dl]), and alsocategorized temporally from ICU admission into early (lessthan 2 days), delayed (between 2–5 days), or late (more than
5 days). Timing by serum urea showed no signiﬁcant
difference in mortality. However, when timing was analyzedin relation to ICU admission, late RRT was associated withgreater crude mortality (72.8% late vs. 62.3% delayed vs. 59%early, P¼0.001) and covariate-adjusted mortality (OR 1.95;
95% CI 1.30–2.92; P¼0.001). Overall, late RRT was asso-
ciated with a longer duration of RRT and stay in hospital, andgreater dialysis dependence.
540It is, however, not clear
whether AKI occurring later in the course of ICU stay has thesame pathophysiology and prognosis than AKI present on orearly after admission. The most recent study on this subject isthe analysis of surgical ICU patients with AKI, showing thatlate initiation of RRT (deﬁned as RIFLE-I or -F) was an inde-pendent predictor of mortality (HR 1.846; CI 1.07–3.18).
541
Traditional indications for RRT, developed for patients
with advanced CKD, are not necessarily valid in the context
of AKI. For instance, massive volume overload resulting from
volume resuscitation may be an indication for RRT even inthe absence of signiﬁcant elevations in BUN or SCr. In thisinstance, it may be more appropriate to consider dialyticintervention in the ICU patient as a form of renal supportrather than renal replacement. Indeed, some of thetraditional indications for dialysis (e.g., uremic pericarditis,pleuritis, encephalopathy, coagulopathy) would be consid-
ered ‘‘complications’’ of AKI rather than indications for RRT.
Additionally, the decision to start RRT should recognize thegoals of therapy, keeping in mind the therapeutic potential ofdialysis in general, and each dialysis modality in particular.The treatment of AKI with RRT has the following goals: i) tomaintain ﬂuid and electrolyte, acid-base, and solute homeo-stasis; ii) to prevent further insults to the kidney; iii) topermit renal recovery; and iv) to allow other supportive
measures (e.g., antibiotics, nutrition support) to proceed
without limitation or complication. Ideally, therapeutic inter-ventions should be designed to achieve the above goals and asystematic assessment of all these factors is key to determi-ning the optimal timing for initiating dialysis (Table 17).
There is increasing evidence that ﬂuid overload in critical
illness and AKI is associated with adverse outcomes,especially in the pediatric setting.
83,84,542–549Whether this isa causal relationship remains to be proven, although arandomized trial in hemodynamically stable patients withacute respiratory distress syndrome seems to suggest thatit is.
549Randomizing patients according to RRT initiation on
the basis of ﬂuid status would allow this question to beanswered. A secondary analysis of a randomized trialcomparing IHD to CRRT showed that patients receivingRRT predominantly for solute control experienced better
outcomes than those predominantly treated for volume
overload. Patients dialyzed for control of both azotemia andvolume overload experienced the worst outcome.
550Analysis
of a multicenter observational cohort showed that meandaily ﬂuid balance in AKI patients was signiﬁcantly morepositive among nonsurvivors than survivors.
84Data from
the PICARD group examining 396 ICU patients with AKIrequiring RRT further supports these ﬁndings. Survivors had
lower ﬂuid accumulation at dialysis initiation compared to
nonsurvivors (8.8% vs. 14.2% of baseline body weight;P¼0.01 adjusted for dialysis modality and severity score).
The adjusted OR for death associated with ﬂuid overload atdialysis initiation was 2.07 (95% CI 1.27–3.37).
83These data
suggest that ﬂuid overload should be further evaluated asparameter to guide the initiation of RRT (see also Pediatric
Considerations ).
Other factors that might inﬂuence the decision of when to
start RRT are the severity of the underlying disease (affectingthe likelihood of recovery of kidney function), the degree ofdysfunction in other organs (affecting the tolerance to e.g.,ﬂuid overload), the prevalent or expected solute burden (e.g.,in tumor lysis syndrome), and the need for ﬂuid input relatedto nutrition or drug therapy (Table 17). Early detection andaccurate prediction of patients that ultimately will require
RRT may allow earlier initiation in those who need it and, at
the same time, prevent harm in those who do not. Recentevidence suggests a potential role for biomarkers in this ﬁeld.Plasma neutrophil gelatinase-associated lipocalin was shownto have an area under the receiver operating characteristiccurve of 0.82 for the prediction of RRT requirement.
551
Pediatric considerations
Provision of acute RRT to children requires special consi-derations. Pediatric and adolescent patients range in age fromthe premature neonate to 25 years of age, with a size range of1.5–200 kg. In addition, the epidemiology of the pediatricAKI has changed from primary kidney disease in the 1980 s toinjury resulting from another systemic illness or its treatment(e.g., sepsis and nephrotoxic medications).
552,553Newborns
with inborn errors of metabolism who do not respond to
dietary and pharmacologic management require expeditious
dialytic removal of ammonia to decrease the risk of death andlong-term neurologic dysfunction,
554and infants who receive
surgical correction of congenital heart disease, often receivePD early after cardiopulmonary bypass to prevent ﬂuidoverload and/or minimize the proinﬂammatory response.Finally, children develop multiorgan dysfunction very rapidlyin their ICU course, with the maximal organ dysfunction
90 Kidney International Supplements (2012) 2, 89–115chapter 5.1
occurring with 72 hours and mortality occurring within 7
days of ICU admission, respectively.555,556Thus, the issue of
timing of dialysis initiation is critically important in children.Both recommendations in this section of the guideline are
applicable to pediatric patients. A detailed discussion of the
speciﬁc pediatric clinical situations is beyond the scope ofTable 17 | Potential applications for RRT
Applications Comments
Renal replacement This is the traditional, prevailing approach based on utilization of RRT when there is little or no residual kidney
function.
Life-threatening indications No trials to validate these criteria.
Hyperkalemia Dialysis for hyperkalemia is effective in removing potassium; however, it requires frequent monitoring of potassium
levels and adjustment of concurrent medical management to prevent relapses.
Acidemia Metabolic acidosis due to AKI is often aggravated by the underlying condition. Correction of metabolic acidosis with
RRT in these conditions depends on the underlying disease process.
Pulmonary edema RRT is often utilized to prevent the need for ventilatory support; however, it is equally important to manage pulmonary
edema in ventilated patients.
Uremic complications(pericarditis, bleeding, etc.)In contemporary practice it is rare to wait to initiate RRT in AKI patients until there are uremic complications.
Nonemergent indications
Solute control BUN reflects factors not directly associated with kidney function, such as catabolic rate and volume status.
SCr is influenced by age, race, muscle mass, and catabolic rate, and by changes in its volume of distribution due tofluid administration or withdrawal.
Fluid removal Fluid overload is an important determinant of the timing of RRT initiation.
Correction of acid-baseabnormalitiesNo standard criteria for initiating dialysis exist.
Renal support This approach is based on the utilization of RRT techniques as an adjunct to enhance kidney function, modify fluidbalance, and control solute levels.
Volume control Fluid overload is emerging as an important factor associated with, and possibly contributing to, adverse outcomes
in AKI.Recent studies have shown potential benefits from extracorporeal fluid removal in CHF.Intraoperative fluid removal using modified ultrafiltration has been shown to improve outcomes in pediatric cardiacsurgery patients.
Nutrition Restricting volume administration in the setting of oliguric AKI may result in limited nutritional support and RRT allows
better nutritional supplementation.
Drug delivery RRT support can enhances the ability to administer drugs without concerns about concurrent fluid accumulation.
Regulation of acid-baseand electrolyte statusPermissive hypercapnic acidosis in patients with lung injury can be corrected with RRT, without inducing fluid overloadand hypernatremia.
Solute modulation Changes in solute burden should be anticipated (e.g., tumor lysis syndrome). Although current evidence is unclear,
studies are ongoing to assess the efficacy of RRT for cytokine manipulation in sepsis.
AKI, acute kidney injury; BUN, blood urea nitrogen; CHF, congestive heart failure; SCr, serum creatinine; RRT, renal replacement therapy.
Table 18 | Fluid overload and outcome in critically ill children with AKI
Author Cohort (N) Outcome P
Goldstein 2001545Single-center (22) Survivors 16% FO Nonsurvivors 34% FO 0.03
Gillespie 2004544Single-center (77) % FO410% with OR death 3.02 0.002
Foland 2004543Single-center (113) 3 organ MODS patients
Survivors 9% FO Nonsurvivors 16% FO1.78 OR death for each 10% FO increase0.01
Goldstein 2005
546Multicenter (116) 2+ organ MODS patients
Survivors 14% FO Nonsurvivors 25% FOo20% FO: 58% survival
420% FO: 40% survival0.002
Hayes 2009
547Single-center (76) Survivors 7% FO Nonsurvivors 22% FO
OR death 6.1 for 420% FO0.001
Sutherland 2010548Multicenter (297) o10% FO: 70% survival
10– 20% FO: 57% survival420% FO: 34% survival
OR 1.03 (1.01– 1.05) per % FO0.001
AKI, acute kidney injury; FO, fluid overload; MODS, multiple-organ dysfunction syndrome; OR, odds ratio.
Reprinted from Goldstein SL. Advances in pediatric renal replacement therapy for acute kidney injury. Semin Dial 2011; 24:
187– 191 with permission from John Wiley and Sons560; accessed http://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/j.1525-139X.2011.00834.x/full
Kidney International Supplements (2012) 2, 89–115 91chapter 5.1
this guideline, and the reader is referred to in-depth
reviews.557,558
Importantly, ﬂuid overload has emerged as a signiﬁcant
factor associated with mortality in children with AKIrequiring CRRT (Table 18), although the physiological linkbetween increasing percent volume overload and mortality isnot completely clear.
543–548,559The largest trial to assess this
relationship in children is a multicenter prospective study
showing that the percentage ﬂuid accumulation at CRRT
initiation is signiﬁcantly lower in survivors vs. non-survivors(14.2±15.9% vs. 25.4 ±32.9%; Po0.03) even after
adjustment for severity of illness. This study also found asigniﬁcantly higher mortality in patient with 420% ﬂuid
overload (58%) vs. o20% ﬂuid overload (40%) at CRRT
initiation.
546One retrospective study, in pediatric patients
who received stem-cell transplantation and developed AKI,
suggested that survival may be improved by an aggressive use
of diuretics and early initiation of RRT. All survivors (n ¼11)
maintained or remained with percentage ﬂuid accumulationo10%, with diuretics and RRT. Among the 15 nonsurvivors,only 6 (40%) had percentage ﬂuid accumulation o10% at
the time of death.
559The latest analysis on this issue
conﬁrmed increased mortality with increasing ﬂuid overloadin 297 children treated with RRT: 29.6% mortality with lessthan 10% ﬂuid overload, 43.1% with 10–20% ﬂuid overload,and 65.6% with 420% ﬂuid overload.
548However, strong
evidence to suggest that preventing this ﬂuid overload withearlier RRT will improve outcome remains absent.
RESEARCH RECOMMENDATIONS
KDetermine reproducible criteria (e.g., fluid overload,biomarker level, severity score) to inform the decision tostart RRT in adult and pediatric AKI patients. Suchcriteria may also permit the identification of patients whowill ultimately require RRT and hence limit uncertainty
around whether to begin therapy.
KDetermine whether early vs. late start of RRT, based on
the above-mentioned criteria, results in improved clinicaloutcomes (e.g., mortality, evolution to CKD Stage 5) ofAKI patients.
SUPPLEMENTARY MATERIAL
Supplementary Table 30: Summary table of RCTs examining the effect
of early vs. late CVVH in the treatment of AKI.
Supplementary material is linked to the online version of the paper at
http://www.kdigo.org/clinical_practice_guidelines/AKI.php
92 Kidney International Supplements (2012) 2, 89–115chapter 5.1
Chapter 5.2: Criteria for stopping renal replacement
therapy in AKI
Although many patients with AKI recover kidney function
sufﬁciently to be independent of RRT, discontinuation ofRRT in AKI has received little attention in the literature. Thedecision whether or when to stop RRT in a patient with AKIneeds to consider an improvement in kidney functionadequate to meet demand, an improvement in the disorderthat prompted kidney support or futility. It is evident
that each of these events is inﬂuenced by the initial
indication for starting RRT and is subject to individualvariation. The strategy for stopping RRT requires considera-tion of additional factors and often involves a modalitytransition.
5.2.1: Discontinue RRT when it is no longer required,
either because intrinsic kidney function has recov-
ered to the point that it is adequate to meet patient
needs, or because RRT is no longer consistent withthe goals of care. ( Not Graded )
RATIONALE
Many, but not all, patients requiring RRT will recoverenough function not to require long-term RRT.
21,394,561
The mean duration of RRT in two recent large RCTswas 12–13 days.
562,563Thus, daily assessment of both
intrinsic kidney function and the ongoing appropriate-ness of RRT consistent with the goals of therapy for thepatient are required. More than 50% of patients with severeAKI will not improve, despite appropriate therapy. Theincidence of withdrawal of life-support treatments incritically ill patients with multiorgan failure has increased
over the last decade.
564In addition to vasoactive medication,
mechanical ventilation, and artiﬁcial nutrition, RRT is one of
the therapies most likely to be discontinued during with-drawal of life support. In general, decisions to withdrawtherapy occur in 10% of all patients from general ICUs, andare responsible for roughly 40% of all deaths. Analysis of adatabase of 383 AKI patients shows withdrawal of lifesupport in 72% of deaths.
565In another single-center
retrospective study involving 179 AKI patients requiringRRT, therapy was withheld or withdrawn in 21.2%.
566A
posthoc analysis of the BEST KIDNEY database showed thatCRRT was withdrawn in 13% of the patients, representing29% of those who died while on CRRT and 21% of allnonsurvivors.
196
Assessment of kidney function during RRT is not easy and
will depend on the modality used. In IHD, the ﬂuctuations ofsolute levels prevent achieving a steady state and thus excludethe use of clearance measurements. Native kidney functioncan only be assessed during the interdialytic period byevaluating urine volume, urinary excretion of creatinine, andchanges in SCr and/or BUN values. However, one mustrealize that intermittent treatment will be associated withpost-treatment rebound in solute levels, and that changes
in BUN and creatinine levels can also be modiﬁed by
nonrenal factors, such as volume status and catabolic rate.In CRRT, continuous solute clearance of 25–35 ml/min willstabilize serum markers after 48 hours. This allows morereliable measurements of CrCl by the native kidneys duringCRRT.
Very few investigators have looked at urine CrCl values as
a guide for CRRT withdrawal. One small retrospective study
(published as abstract) demonstrated that a CrCl (measured
over 24 hours) 415 ml/min was associated with successful
termination of CRRT, deﬁned as the absence of CRRTrequirement for at least 14 days following cessation.
567
Further prospective trials will be needed to support theseﬁndings. A large prospective observational study showedthat, in 529 patients who survived the initial period of CRRT,313 were successfully removed from RRT, whereas 216
patients needed ‘‘repeat CRRT’’ within 7 days of discontinua-
tion. Multivariate logistic regression identiﬁed urine outputas the most signiﬁcant predictor of successful termination(OR 1.078 per 100 ml/d). Not surprisingly, the predictiveability of urine output was negatively affected by the useof diuretics.
196Another retrospective observational analysis
showed that, of a total of 304 patients with postoperativeAKI requiring RRT (IHD), 31% could be weaned for more
than 5 days and 21% were successfully weaned for at least
30 days. Independent predictors for restarting RRT within30 days were longer duration of RRT, a higher SequentialOrgan Failure Assessment score, oliguria, and age 465
years.
568In other words, urine output seems to be a very
important predictor of successful discontinuation of RRT.Whether too-early discontinuation of RRT, requiringreinstitution, is by itself harmful has not been properly
investigated. The above-mentioned observational studies
found a higher mortality in patients who needed to beretreated with RRT (42.7% vs. 28.5%
196and 79.7% vs.
40%568). It is, however, not clear whether failure to wean is
simply a marker of illness severity or contributed by itself tothe adverse outcome.
The process of stopping RRT may consist of simple
discontinuation of RRT, or may include a change in thehttp://www.kidney-international.org chapter 5.2
&2012 KDIGO
Kidney International Supplements (2012) 2, 89–115 93
modality, frequency, or duration of RRT. For example,
switching from CRRT to IHD, or decreasing the frequency ofIHD from daily to every other day, represents differentmethods of testing the ability of the patient’s own kidney totake over. No speciﬁc guidance can be provided for how tomanage the transition of RRT from continuous to inter-mittent. Evidence from large observational studies suggeststhat large variation in practice exists.
196
5.2.2: We suggest not using diuretics to enhance kidney
function recovery, or to reduce the duration orfrequency of RRT. ( 2B)
RATIONALE
The role of diuretics in the prevention and treatment of AKIhas already been discussed in Chapter 3.4. Only one RCT hasevaluated the potential role of diuretics in resolving AKI inpatients receiving RRT. After the end of the CVVH session,
the urine of the ﬁrst 4 hours was collected for measuring
CrCl. Seventy one patients were subsequently randomized toreceive furosemide (0.5 mg/kg/h) or placebo by continuousinfusion, continued until CrCl reached 30 ml/min. Urinaryﬂuid losses were compensated by i.v. infusion. The primaryend-point was renal recovery (CrCl 430 ml/min or stable
SCr without RRT) in the ICU and in the hospital. CVVHwas restarted based on predeﬁned criteria. Patients treated
with furosemide (n ¼36) had a signiﬁcantly increased
urinary volume and greater sodium excretion compared to
placebo-treated patients (n ¼35). However, there were no
differences in need for repeated CVVH, or renal recoveryduring ICU or hospital stay.
195An observational study of
discontinuation of RRT also found no difference in diureticuse between patents with successful or unsuccessful dis-continuation of IHD.
568In summary, diuretics may improve
urine volume after RRT, but do not appear to have anysigniﬁcant beneﬁt in reducing the need for RRT or promotingrenal recovery from AKI.Pediatric considerations
The medical indications guiding discontinuation of RRT inchildren do not differ from adults, except in those instanceswhere RRT is initiated for pediatric-speciﬁc disease, such asinborn errors of metabolism to treat hyperammonemia
557or
immediately after surgical correction of congenital heartdisease to maintain euvolemia, and/or possibly mitigate thepostbypass proinﬂammatory response.
558
Prognosis in children who survive an AKI episode is
signiﬁcantly better than in adults, and many children may haveseveral decades of life expectancy. Askenazi demonstrated nearly80% 3- to 5-year survival for children discharged after an AKIepisode from a tertiary center,
569yet two-thirds of deaths occur-
red in the ﬁrst 2 years after discharge, suggesting a high prob-ability of greater life expectancy after that period. In addition, nodata exist to deﬁne a maximal RRT duration; even data from the
Prospective Pediatric CRRT Registry show 35% survival in
children receiving CRRT for 428 days.
570Finally, since pediatric
AKI now results more often as a secondary phenomenon fromanother systemic illness or its treatment,
552,553determination of
the overall goals of therapy for children, as in for adults, musttake into consideration local standards, patient and familywishes, as well as the probability of recovery of the underlyingillness leading to AKI and the need for RRT.
RESEARCH RECOMMENDATIONS
KDetermine clinical parameters (e.g., parameters of kidney
function, fluid overload, hypercatabolism) that predict
successful discontinuation of RRT in AKI patients.
KDetermine biomarkers that may indicate renal recovery,and whether their levels can be used to guide disconti-nuation of RRT.
KDetermine more reliable predictors of long-term out-comes (e.g., mortality, quality of life) in AKI patients(including clinical severity scores, biomarkers, machine
learning techniques, or combinations of these), that—
after validation in large cohorts—could be helpfuladjuncts in the decision to withdraw treatment.
94 Kidney International Supplements (2012) 2, 89–115chapter 5.2
Chapter 5.3: Anticoagulation
In patients with AKI requiring RRT, the contact of blood with
the foreign surface of the extracorporeal circuit results in
activation of both the intrinsic and the extrinsic pathway ofplasmatic coagulation and activation of platelets.
571Preven-
tion of dialyzer/hemoﬁlter clotting often requires someform of anticoagulation, which may represent a particularchallenge in patients with AKI. The need for continuousanticoagulation represents a potential drawback of CRRT.
5.3.1: In a patient with AKI requiring RRT, base the
decision to use anticoagulation for RRT on assess-
ment of the patient’s potential risks and beneﬁtsfrom anticoagulation (see Figure 17). ( Not Graded )
5.3.1.1: We recommend using anticoagulation
during RRT in AKI if a patient doesnot have an increased bleeding risk orimpaired coagulation and is not already
receiving systemic anticoagulation. ( 1B)
RATIONALE
The goal of anticoagulation with RRT is to prevent clotting of
the ﬁlter and/or reduction in membrane permeability, andthus to achieve adequate RRT and to prevent blood loss inthe clotted ﬁlter. These beneﬁts have to be weighed against
the risk of bleeding, and economic issues, such as workload
and costs.
Patients with impaired coagulation (e.g., thrombocytopenia,
or prolonged prothrombin time or activated partial thrombo-plastin time [aPTT]), due to underlying diseases such as liverfailure or dilution coagulopathy, may not beneﬁt fromadditional anticoagulation for RRT. In two recent large trials50–60% of AKI patients requiring RRT were treated without
anticoagulant.
562,563While ﬁlter performance was not assessed,
adequate CRRT ﬁlter survival without anticoagulation has
mostly been described in patients with coagulopathies.572– 575
However, no speciﬁc cut-off points have been determined forplatelet count, aPTT, Internati onal Normalized Ratio, ﬁbrino-
gen, or other coagulation factors that would indicate thepossibility to perform RRT without anticoagulation. On theother hand, prolonged clotting times can also point to a con-
sumptive coagulopathy based on the presence of an activated
coagulation. In these patients, frequent ﬁlter clotting will occurand necessitate a switch to some form of anticoagulation.
576
In patients that are treated without anticoagulation,
special attention is required to non-anticoagulant strategiesto prolong ﬁlter survival. These include a good functioningvascular access, the reduction of blood viscosity andhemoconcentration by saline ﬂushes, predilution, high bloodﬂow rates, diffusive treatment, the reduction of blood-air
contact in the bubble trap, and assuring prompt reaction to
alarms.
577,578
Many patients with AKI require systemic anticoagulation
for their underlying diseases (e.g., artiﬁcial heart valve, acutecoronary syndrome, atrial ﬁbrillation). It is evident that, inmost instances, these patients will not require additionalanticoagulation for RRT; however, this should be assessed ona case-by-case basis.
5.3.2: For patients without an increased bleeding
risk or impaired coagulation and not already
receiving effective systemic anticoagulation, we
suggest the following:
5.3.2.1: For anticoagulation in intermittent RRT,
we recommend using either unfractio-
nated or low-molecular-weight heparin,rather than other anticoagulants. (1C)
5.3.2.2: For anticoagulation in CRRT, we sug-
gest using regional citrate anticoagula-tion rather than heparin in patientswho do not have contraindications forcitrate. (2B)
5.3.2.3: For anticoagulation during CRRT in
patients who have contraindications forcitrate, we suggest usin g either unfractio-
nated or low-molecular-weight heparin,
rather than other anticoagulants. (2C)
RATIONALE
Worldwide, unfractionated heparin is still the most widely
used anticoagulant. Many European centers, however, haveswitched from unfractionated to low-molecular-weightheparin for routine anticoagulation during IHD.
579Advan-
tages and disadvantages of each type of heparin are
summarized in Table 19.
A recent meta-analysis of 11 RCTs comparing unfractio-
nated to low-molecular-weight heparin in chronic IHD
concluded that both are equally safe in terms of bleed-ing complications (RR 0.96; CI 0.27–3.43) and as effectivein preventing extracorporeal thrombosis (RR 1.15; CI0.7–1.91).
586Mainly because of the convenience of using a
single bolus injection at the start of IHD, the reduced risk of
heparin-induced thrombocytopenia (HIT), and of long-term
side-effects such as abnormal serum lipids, osteoporosis, andhypoaldosteronism, the European practice guideline forprevention of dialyzer clotting suggests using low-molecu-lar-weight rather than unfractionated heparin in chronicdialysis patients.
587Many European centers have extrapolatedhttp://www.kidney-international.org chapter 5.3
&2012 KDIGO
Kidney International Supplements (2012) 2, 89–115 95
this to IHD for AKI, although studies in this setting are
lacking. In patients with AKI, the dose of heparin for IHDand the target aPTT should be individualized according tothe presence or absence of coagulation abnormalities and/orrisk of bleeding.
588,589Monitoring should also include
platelet count, allowing timely detection of HIT.581Since
low-molecular-weight heparins rely on the kidney as primaryroute of elimination, patients with kidney injury are at risk
of accumulation and bleeding complications, dependingon the degree of kidney injury, and the dose and type of
low-molecular-weight heparin.
590The American College of
Chest Physicians (ACCP) guidelines for antithrombotic andthrombolytic therapy therefore suggest using unfractionatedinstead of low-molecular-weight heparin in patients withsevere renal insufﬁciency (CrCl o30 ml/min) who require
therapeutic anticoagulation, or to reduce the dose of low-molecular-weight heparin by 50%.
580The doses of low-
molecular-weight heparin that are required for IHD areImpaired 
coagulation?  Proceed without  
anticoagulation  Yes 
Underlying 
condition requires 
systemic 
anticoagulation?  Use anticoagulation 
adapted to this 
condition  Yes No 
Choose RRT 
Modality  CRRT Intermittent RRT  
Contraindication 
to Citrate?  
Increased 
Bleeding Risk?  Regional Citrate 
Anticoagulation  No 
Heparin  
Proceed without 
anticoagulation  Yes Yes 
No 
Increased 
Bleeding 
Risk?  Heparin  
Proceed without 
anticoagulationYes No Rec 
5.3.1.1 
Recs 
5.3.2.2 
& 
5.3.3.1 
Rec 
5.3.2.3 
Rec 
5.3.2.1 Rec 
5.3.3.2 No 
Figure 17 |Flow-chart summary of recommendations. Heparin includes low-molecular-weight or unfractionated heparin.
CRRT, continuous renal replacement therapy; RRT, renal replacement therapy.
96 Kidney International Supplements (2012) 2, 89–115chapter 5.3
lower than those required for therapeutic anticoagulation.
The doses of low-molecular-weight heparin, as provided bythe manufacturers, should be adapted to the bleeding risk ofthe individual patient. Dose reduction may also be requiredin patients receiving daily dialysis, which increases the riskof accumulation. Since many patients with AKI requireprophylaxis for deep-vein thrombosis, scheduling this
prophylactic (or a slightly higher) dose at the beginning of
the dialysis session may serve the two purposes. Periodicmeasurement of anti–Factor Xa levels may be useful withprolonged use.
Alternative anticoagulants for IHD include protease
inhibitors such as nafamostate and platelet inhibitors suchas prostacyclin or its analogues. Randomized trials compar-ing these anticoagulants/antiaggregants with heparin in the
setting of IHD for AKI are not available, and their use in
clinical practice is limited. Nafamostat is a protease inhibitorthat is mainly used in Japan and not available in the USA orEurope. Small observational trials in chronic dialysis patientswith increased bleeding risk suggest a reduced bleedingincidence.
591–593Concerns with nafamostat include the
absence of an antidote, and side-effects such as anaphylaxis,hyperkalemia, and bone marrow suppression.
594–596Cross-
over comparisons of prostacyclin with low-molecular-weightheparin in chronic dialysis patients show reduced efﬁ-ciency.
597A small trial showed reduced bleeding complica-
tions compared to low-dose heparin; however, at the expenseof slightly more premature terminations.
598Additional
drawbacks are systemic hypotension and the high costs.Therefore, the routine use of alternative anticoagulants cannot be recommended in patients with AKI.The anticoagulant effect of sodium citrate relies on
forming a complex with ionized calcium, thus removing anessential component of the coagulation cascade. Part of thecitrate is removed in the extracorporeal circuit. Citratereaching the systemic circulation is rapidly metabolized inthe liver, muscle, and kidney, liberating the calcium andproducing bicarbonate. The buffering effect of sodium citrate
is proportional to the sodium ions it contains: a mole of
trisodium citrate produces the same buffering effect as3 moles of sodium bicarbonate; whereas preparations ofcitrate, including hydrogen citrate, have proportionally lessbuffering effect. Extracorporeal losses of calcium have to becompensated by an exogenous infusion. Additional compli-cations of citrate are summarized in Table 19. Regional citrateanticoagulation requires a strict protocol, adapted to the local
treatment modality and ﬂow settings. The protocol should
include instructions for the infusion of citrate and calcium,for the composition of the dialysate/replacement ﬂuid, andfor intensive metabolic monitoring, including acid-basestatus, sodium, and total and ionized calcium levels.
Five randomized trials have compared citrate to heparins
during CRRT (Suppl Tables 31 and 32). For ethical reasons,these trials were performed in patients without increased
bleeding risk. The ﬁrst trial by Monchi et al. used a crossover
design to compare anticoagulation with unfractionated
heparin or citrate in 20 patients treated with postdilutionCVVH. Patients with high bleeding risk, liver cirrhosis, andsensitivity to heparin were excluded. Forty-nine ﬁlters wereevaluated. Citrate was titrated to achieve a postﬁlter ionizedcalcium level below 1.20 mg/dl (0.3 mmol/l). The dosingregimen of heparin consisted of a bolus of 2000 to 5000 U,Table 19 | Overview of the advantages and disadvantages of different anticoagulants in AKI patients
Anticoagulant Advantage Disadvantage References
Heparin (unfractionated) Wide availability Narrow therapeutic index – risk of bleeding
580,581Large experience Unpredictable kinetics – monitoring required
Short half-life HIT
Antagonist available Heparin resistance
Monitoring with routine tests
(aPTT or ACT)Low costs
Low-molecular-weightheparinMore predictable kinetics– Weight-based dosing possibleRisk of accumulation in kidney failure
580,582– 584 More reliable anticoagulant response– No monitoring requiredMonitoring requires nonroutine test (anti– Factor Xa)
Single predialysis dose may besufficient in IHDDifferent drugs not interchangeable
Reduced risk of HIT Incomplete reversal by protamine
In most countries more expensive than unfractionated heparin
Citrate Strict regional anticoagulation
– reduced bleeding riskRisk of accidental overdose with potentially fatal consequences
585Insufficient citrate metabolism in patients with reduced liverfunction and shock states resulting in accumulation with metabolicacidosis and hypocalcemiaOther metabolic complication (acidosis, alkalosis, hypernatremia,hypocalcemia, hypercalcemia)Increased complexityRequires strict protocol
aPTT, activated partial thromboplastin time; ACT, activated clotting time; HIT, heparin-induced thrombocytopenia; IHD, intermittent hemodialy sis
Kidney International Supplements (2012) 2, 89–115 97chapter 5.3
followed by a continuous infusion of 500–2000 U/h, aiming
at an aPTT of 60–80 seconds. Despite this rather high heparindose, the citrate group had a longer ﬁlter lifetime and lessspontaneous ﬁlter failure. Fewer patients in the citrate grouprequired transfusion, and the number of transfused units wasalso lower. One patient in the heparin group experiencedbleeding and one patient in the citrate group had metabolicalkalosis.
599
The second trial randomized 30 patients with AKI
undergoing predilution continuous venovenous hemodiaﬁl-tration (CVVHDF) to anticoagulation with citrate orunfractionated heparin. Patients with contra-indications toone of the two anticoagulants (mainly high bleeding risk/severe coagulopathy or metabolic problems that might beaggravated by citrate) or who required systemic antic-oagulation for medical reasons were excluded. Heparin was
titrated to achieve an aPTT of 45–65 seconds. Citrate was
titrated to a postﬁlter ionized calcium between 1.0–1.40 mg/dl(0.25–0.35 mmol/l). Two patients in each group crossed overto the other anticoagulant and these ﬁlters were not includedin the analysis. The trial was stopped early after 79 ﬁltersbecause of an advantage using citrate, which resulted in asigniﬁcantly improved ﬁlter survival (124.5 hours vs. 38.3hours; Po0.001). In addition, signiﬁcantly less citrate-
anticoagulated ﬁlters were terminated for clotting (16.7%vs. 53.5%). The incidence of bleeding also tended to be lowerwith citrate (RR 0.17; CI 0.03–1.04; P¼0.06), but transfusion
requirement was not signiﬁcantly different. Three patients inthe citrate group had metabolic alkalosis and two hadhypocalcemia.
600
The third trial randomized 48 patients with AKI, treated
with CVVH, to citrate or unfract ionated heparin. Patients
requiring systemic anticoagulation for medical reasons andpatients with high bleeding risk, severe coagulopathy, circulatoryfailure, liver failure, or hypocalcemia were excluded (n ¼12).
A total of 142 circuits was analyzed. Heparin was administeredas a bolus of 3000–5000 U followed by a continuous infusion of1500 U/h adjusted to achieve an aPTT of 50–70 seconds. Citrate(500 mmol/l) was titrated to a postﬁlter ionized calciumbetween 1.0– 1.20 mg/dl (0.25–0.30 mmol/l). Neither circuit
survival nor the reasons for disconnecting the CVVH circuit
differed signiﬁcantly between the two groups. However, thenumber of major bleedings and the need for transfusion wassigniﬁcantly greater in the heparin group. Two cases ofmetabolic alkalosis were noted in the heparin group and twoepisodes of hypocalcemia in the citrate group.
601Findings from
two studies published after the cut-off date for our literaturereview are consistent with recommendation 5.3.2.2.
601a,601b
A small randomized crossover study compared citrate
anticoagulation to regional heparinization in 10 CVVHpatients. Both treatment arms had a relatively short ﬁlter life(13 hours for regional heparinization and 17 hours forcitrate) that did not differ signiﬁcantly. No bleeding occurredin either group.
602
In the largest and most recent randomized trial, 200 patients
treated with postdilution CVVH were randomized to citrate orthe low-molecular-weight heparin, nadroparin. Again, patientswith bleeding risk or liver cirrhosis were excluded. Nadroparinwas started with a bolus of 2850 U followed by 380 U/h withoutfurther monitoring. Citrate (500 mmol/l) was administered at adose of 3 mmol per liter blood ﬂow, without monitoring ofpostﬁlter ionized calcium. The primary outcomes were safety,deﬁned as the absence of adverse events necessitating disconti-nuation of the study anticoagulant, and efﬁcacy, deﬁned as circuit
survival. Safety was signiﬁcantly better in the citrate group with
only two patients requiring a change in anticoagulation regimenvs. 20 patients in the nadroparin group ( P40.001). Adverse
events were citrate accumulation (n ¼1) and early clotting due to
protocol violation (n ¼1) in the citrate group, and bleeding
(n¼16) or severe thrombocytopenia (n ¼4) in the nadroparin
group. Circuit survival did not signiﬁcantly differ. A computer-driven combination of buffered and nonbuffered replacement
ﬂuids was used in the citrate gr oup, explaining why metabolic
alkalosis occurred more frequently in the nadroparin group.
Rather surprisingly, the authors also found an improved renalrecovery and an improved hospital survival in the citrate group.This could not be attributed to differences in severity of illness,nor in bleeding or transfusion requirement, and requires furtherinvestigation.
603
Metabolic complications were infrequent in these rando-
mized trials. In observational trials, the most frequentmetabolic complication is metabolic alkalosis, occurring inup to 50% of the patients.
604–606In recently published surveys
or large clinical trials, the use of regional citrate antic-oagulation is still limited to 0–20% of the patients/treatments.
562,563,607
A major contra-indication for the use of citrate antic-
oagulation is severely impaired liver function or shock with
muscle hypoperfusion, both representing a risk of citrate
accumulation. Markedly reduced citrate clearances and lowerionized calcium levels have been found in patients with acuteliver failure or with severe liver cirrhosis.
608–610These patients
were excluded in all the randomized trials. In patients at risk,intensiﬁed monitoring is recommendable. The ratio of totalto ionized calcium appears to be the best parameter to detectcitrate accumulation
611,612with an optimal cutoff at 2.1.613
Another important drawback of citrate anticoagulation, thatmight inﬂuence the decision to implement it in routineclinical practice, is the increased complexity of the procedure,with risk of metabolic complications and the need for a strictprotocol adapted to the local RRT modality. We, therefore,only recommend the use of citrate for anticoagulation duringCRRT in patients that do not have shock or severe liverfailure, and in centers that have an established protocol for
citrate anticoagulation.
Unfractionated heparin still remains the most widely used
anticoagulant during CRRT,
562,563,607mostly administered as
a preﬁlter infusion, with large variability in the administered
doses. When choosing a dose of heparin, the clinician shouldrealize that the relationship among heparin dose, aPTT, ﬁltersurvival, and bleeding complications is not straightfor-ward,
574,614–619but it is common practice to measure aPTT
98 Kidney International Supplements (2012) 2, 89–115chapter 5.3
for safety reasons and to adapt the target to the bleeding risk
of the patient.
Only two small prospective RCTs have compared un-
fractionated to low-molecular-weight heparin for anti-coagulation during CRRT in patients with AKI and, thus,no ﬁrm recommendations can be made. The ﬁrst trialrandomized 47 patients with AKI or systemic inﬂammatoryresponse syndrome undergoing CVVHDF to heparin, start-
ing with a bolus of 2000–5000 U followed by an infusion of
10 U/kg/h titrated to an aPTT of 70–80 seconds, or todalteparin administered as bolus of 20 U/kg followed by aninfusion of 10 U/kg/h. The mean aPTT in the heparin groupwas 79 seconds. The mean anti–Factor Xa level, determined insix patients in the dalteparin group, was 0.49 U/ml. Only 37of the 82 tested ﬁlters were stopped for coagulation. Therewas no difference in ﬁlter survival (with electively discon-
tinued ﬁlters being censored). The mean time to ﬁlter failure
was 46.8 hours in the dalteparin group and 51.7 hours in theheparin group (NS). Three patients in each group hadbleeding, with no difference in transfusion requirementbetween the two groups. Daily costs, including the coagula-tion assays, were 10% higher with dalteparin.
620
The second trial used a crossover design in 40 patients
with normal coagulation parameters undergoing predilution
CVVH. Patients treated with unfractionated heparin received
a bolus of 30 U/kg followed by a continuous infusion of7 U/kg/h titrated to achieve an aPTT of 40–45 seconds.Enoxaparin was given as an initial bolus of 0.15 mg/kgfollowed by a continuous infusion of 0.05 mg/kg/h, adjustedto an anti– Factor Xa level of 0.25–0.30 U/ml. In the 37patients that completed both treatment arms, mean ﬁlter lifewas 21.7 hours with heparin and 30.6 hours with enoxaparin
(P¼0.017). A similar difference was found in the per-
protocol analysis. The incidence of bleeding was low and not
different between the two anticoagulants. Filter life did notcorrelate with aPTT or anti– Factor Xa level. Costs weresimilar in the two groups.
616Interestingly, these clinical
studies did not ﬁnd a correlation between anti– Factor Xalevels and ﬁlter life, questioning the value of anti– Factor Xamonitoring with regard to efﬁcacy.
616,621However, if used for
more than a few days, monitoring might be useful to detectaccumulation.
Alternative anticoagulants for use during CRRT include
the protease inhibitor nafamostate and the platelet inhibitors,prostacyclin and analogues. Both have a short half-life and alow MW, with the theoretical advantage of extracorporealelimination and reduced systemic anticoagulation. Nafamo-stat is not available in the USA and Europe; there is no
antidote and several side-effects (agranulocytosis, hyperkale-
mia, anaphylactoid reactions) have been described.
594–596A
few small trials showed improved ﬁlter survival during CRRTwhen adding prostaglandins to heparin compared to heparinalone.
622–624However, prostaglandins appear to have a
limited efﬁcacy when used alone, induce systemic hypoten-sion,
625,626and are expensive. Their use during CRRT can
therefore not be recommended.5.3.3: For patients with increased bleeding risk who are
not receiving anticoagulation, we suggest thefollowing for anticoagulation during RRT:
5.3.3.1: We suggest using regional citrate anti-
coagulation, rather than no anticoagula-tion, during CRRT in a patient withoutcontraindications for citrate. (2C)
5.3.3.2: We suggest avoiding regional heparini-
zation during CRRT in a patient withincreased risk of bleeding. (2C)
RATIONALE
The risk of bleeding is considered high in patients with recent(within 7 days) or active bleeding, with recent trauma orsurgery (especially in head trauma and neurosurgery), recentstroke, intracranial arteriovenous malformation or aneurysm,
retinal hemorrhage, uncontrolled hypertension, or presence
of an epidural catheter. In these patients, the beneﬁt ofanticoagulation may not outweigh the risk of bleeding,and they should (at least initially) be treated withoutanticoagulation, or with CRRT with regional citrate anti-coagulation.
We suggest performing RRT without anticoagulation in
patients with increased bleeding risk. A possible exception
can be made for patients who do not have contraindications
for citrate. Randomized trials comparing citrate withheparins have been performed in patients without increasedbleeding risk. However, since citrate results in strictly regionalanticoagulation, it seems reasonable to also suggest its useduring CRRT in AKI patients with increased bleeding risk.
Another approach to achieve regional anticoagulation is
regional heparinization combining a preﬁlter dose of heparin,
aiming at a prolongation of the extracorporeal aPTT, with
postﬁlter neutralization with protamine, aiming at normali-zing the systemic aPTT. This procedure has been described inchronic dialysis and CRRT,
572,573,624,627,628but has not been
studied with much scrutiny. It is cumbersome and difﬁcult totitrate because heparin has a much longer half-life thanprotamine, inducing a risk of rebound. In addition, it exposesthe patient to the side-effects of both heparin (mainly the risk
of HIT) and protamine (mainly anaphylaxis, platelet dysfunc-
tion, hypotension, and pulmonary vasoconstriction with rightventricular failure)
629and is therefore not recommended.
5.3.4: In a patient with heparin-induced thrombocytopenia
(HIT), all heparin must be stopped and werecommend using direct thrombin inhibitors (suchas argatroban) or Factor Xa inhibitors (such as
danaparoid or fondaparinux) rather than other or
no anticoagulation during RRT. ( 1A)
5.3.4.1: In a patient with HIT who does not have
severe liver failure, we suggest usingargatroban rather than other thrombinor Factor Xa inhibitors during RRT. ( 2C)
Kidney International Supplements (2012) 2, 89–115 99chapter 5.3
RATIONALE
Immune-mediated HIT results from antibodies directed
against the complex of heparin and platelet factor 4, andoccurs in 1–3% of heparin-exposed patients. Its main clinicalcomplication is the development of thrombocytopenia withor without thrombosis.
581In patients with AKI undergoing
CRRT, the diagnosis should therefore also be suspected inpatients with repeated premature ﬁlter clotting.
630The
likelihood of having HIT can be predicted by the so-called4 T score, that includes the degree of thrombocytopenia, thetiming of onset of the fall in platelet count, the presenceof thrombosis or acute systemic symptoms, and the presenceof other etiologies of thrombocytopenia.
631If HIT is likely, all
heparins have to be stopped, including any ‘‘heparin lock’’solutions for dialysis or other catheters.
With regard to the diagnosis and management of HIT,
we refer to the recent guideline of the ACCP
581and the
European best practice guideline on chronic dialysis.587These
guidelines recommend the use of therapeutic doses of analternative nonheparin anticoagulant in patients with strongsuspicion of HIT. Candidates are the direct thrombininhibitors lepirudin, argatroban, or bivaluridin, or the anti-thrombin-dependent Factor Xa inhibitors, danaparoid orfondaparinix. Pharmacokinetic data and dosing guidelines
for these alternative anticoagulants have been published for
IHD
588,632and CRRT.633
Argatroban is a direct thrombin inhibitor, is eliminated
by the liver, has a short half-life, and can be monitoredwith aPTT.
634A recent observational study on the use of
argatroban for anticoagulation during continuous dialysis in30 patients with AKI and HIT derived a dosing equation,based on illness severity scores or by use of indocyanine green
plasma clearance.
635Regional citrate anticoagulation has
been used along with reduced doses of argatroban or other
nonheparin anticoagulants in cases where bleeding occurs.However, there are no published reports on this practice.
Pediatric considerations
Standardized protocols have been well established for bothheparin and regional citrate anticoagulation in childrenreceiving dialysis. The ppCRRT Registry Group has shownthat heparin- and citrate-based anticoagulation protocolshave been shown to confer equitable ﬁlter survival in
pediatric CRRT, and the use of either is clearly supported
over the use of no anticoagulation schemes.
636The main
advantage of citrate anticoagulation was the prevention ofsystemic pharmacological anticoagulation of the patient,which can be an issue in patients with multiorgan failure andsepsis. Calcium is a requisite cofactor in both the intrinsicand extrinsic coagulation cascades. Citrate functions bybinding free calcium, thereby inhibiting coagulation in both
the intrinsic and extrinsic coagulation pathways. The mostfrequently studied pediatric citrate protocol
636–638uses
Anticoagulant Dextrose solution A (ACD-A, Baxter Health-
care, USA), prescribed based on the blood ﬂow rate:
ACD rate ðml=hÞ¼blood pump rate ðml=min/C2min =hÞ/C21:5
ACD-A is infused via a stopcock at the catheter-CRRT
circuit connection leading to the CRRT machine. Since our
prescribed blood pump ﬂow is 200 ml/min, the resultingACD-A rate would be 300 ml/h. The second aspect of thecitrate protocol provides prevention of citrate-inducedsystemic hypocalcemia by providing a calcium chloride
continuous infusion (8 g calcium chloride per liter normal
saline) to the patient via a central line. The calcium chloriderate is also based on the blood pump rate:
Calcium chloride ðml=hÞ¼blood pump rate ðml=min/C2min =hÞ/C20:6
The goals of regional citrate anticoagulation are to
maintain the circuit ionized calcium between 0.8 and1.6 mg/dl (0.2 and 0.4 mmol/l), and the patient’s systemicionized calcium in the normal physiologic range 4.4–5.2 mg/dl (1.1–1.3 mmol/l). The circuit ionized calcium concentra-tion is managed by adjustment of the citrate rate, while the
patient’s systemic ionized calcium concentration is managed
by adjustment of the calcium chloride rate.
RESEARCH RECOMMENDATIONS
KRandomized trials should compare unfractionated tolow-molecular-weight heparin during IHD in patientswith AKI.
KRandomized trials should compare unfractionated tolow-molecular-weight heparin during CRRT in patientswith AKI.
KRandomized trials should compare citrate to unfractio-
nated to low-molecular-weight heparin during CRRT in
patients with AKI.
KFuture trials should compare a strategy without anti-coagulation against one of anticoagulation during CRRT.
KOutcomes of interest for trials testing different anti-coagulation strategies with RRT in AKI are clinicalend-points, including bleeding, renal recovery, mortality,incidence of HIT, and surrogates such as circuit survival
and efficiency of dialysis, metabolic complications, and
effects on the coagulation system.
SUPPLEMENTARY MATERIAL
Supplementary Table 31: Evidence profile of RCTs examining the effect
of citrate vs. heparin/nadroparin in CRRT for AKI.
Supplementary Table 32: Summary table of RCTs examining the effect
of citrate vs. heparin/nadroparin in CRRT for AKI.
Supplementary material is linked to the online version of the paper at
http://www.kdigo.org/clinical_practice_guidelines/AKI.php
100 Kidney International Supplements (2012) 2, 89–115chapter 5.3
Chapter 5.4: Vascular access for renal replacement
therapy in AKI
Functional vascular access is essential for adequate RRT. Basic
requirements are to ensure adequate and regular ﬂow withlow morbidity. Most studies on indwelling tunneled dialysiscatheters have been performed in chronic dialysis patients.For individuals requiring acute dialysis, the evidence ondialysis catheters is more limited, but there is a body ofliterature on nondialysis central venous catheters (CVC) in
intensive-care patients. Many of the recommendations for
patients requiring acute dialysis are, therefore, based onextrapolation of evidence from tunneled dialysis catheters orfrom nondialysis nontunneled CVC.
5.4.1: We suggest initiating RRT in patients with AKI via
an uncuffed nontunneled dialysis catheter, rather
than a tunneled catheter. ( 2D)
RATIONALE
Since most early catheter-related infections have a cutaneousorigin, tunneling the catheter under the skin together with asubcutaneous anchoring system, may reduce the risk ofinfection. Tunneling also increases mechanical stability ofthe catheter. On the other hand, the insertion of a tunneled
cuffed catheter (TCC) is a cumbersome procedure that
requires expertise (mostly performed by surgeons or inter-ventional radiologists), time, and effort (mostly performed inthe operating room or radiology department), thus poten-tially delaying initiation of RRT. The removal of TCCs is alsotechnically more difﬁcult.
A randomized trial compared the initial use of tunneled
vs. nontunneled femoral catheters in 34 patients with AKI.
Failure to insert the TCC occurred in four patients (12%)
that were excluded from the ﬁnal analysis. In the remaining30 patients, those with tunneled catheters had an increasedinsertion time and more femoral hematomas, but also lessdysfunction, fewer infectious and thrombotic complications,and a signiﬁcantly better catheter survival.
639The small size
of this study and the absence of an intention-to-treat analysispreclude ﬁrm conclusions (Suppl Table 33). In addition, the
use of tunneled catheters for starting acute dialysis is not
widespread practice.
Both the Centers for Disease Control (CDC) guidelines for
prevention of catheter-related infections and the KDOQIguideline for vascular access in chronic dialysis patientsr e c o m m e n du s i n gac u f f e dc a t h e t e rf o rd i a l y s i si fap r o l o n g e d(e.g.,41–3 weeks) period of temporary access is antici-
pated.
640,641In two recent large randomized trials, the meanduration of RRT for AKI was 12–13 days.562,563This probably
does not justify the burden of an initial tunneled catheter in allpatients with AKI receiving RRT. Rather, selected use of tunneled
catheters in patients who require prolonged RRT is warranted.
No recommendation can be given regarding the optimal
timing to change the nontunneled-uncuffed catheter to a morepermanent access. It seems reasonable to create a more
permanent access when recovery of kidney function is unlikely.
The optimal timing should take into account the increased riskof infection with untunneled catheters, but also the practicalissues related to the insertion of a tunneled catheter.
Several conﬁgurations of dialysis catheter lumen and tip
have emerged over the years with no proven advantage of onedesign over another. The outer diameter varies between 11and 14 French and it is self-evident that larger sizes decrease
the risk of inadequate blood ﬂow. In order to provide an
adequate blood ﬂow and reduce the risk of recirculation,the tip of the catheter should be in a large vein (seeRecommendation 5.4.2). This means that the optimal lengthis 12–15 cm for the right internal jugular vein, 15–20 cm forthe left internal jugular vein, and 19–24 cm for the femoralvein.
642–644
In PD, the Tenckhoff catheter, a soft, silicone rubber
catheter with a polyester cuff, reduced early complications suchas bowel perforation, massive bleeding, or leakage, and hasbecome the standard for PD. Further modiﬁcations, includingthe use of swan-neck catheters, T-ﬂuted catheters, curledintraperitoneal portions, dual cuffs, and insertion through therectus muscle instead of the midline, have been made to reduceremaining complications such as peritonitis, exit/tunnelinfection, cuff extrusion, obstruction, and dialysate leaks.
645,646
Blind placement has been largely replaced by surgicalplacement or placement guided by ultrasound/ﬂuoroscopy,laparoscopy, or peritoneoscopy.
647–649Continuous-ﬂow PD
dictates the need for an efﬁcient dual-lumen catheter or twoseparate catheters with ports separated maximally.
646Outside
the pediatric setting, no investigations have speciﬁcally lookedat peritoneal catheters in the setting of AKI.
5.4.2: When choosing a vein for insertion of a dialysis
catheter in patients with AKI, consider these
preferences ( Not Graded ):
KFirst choice: right jugular vein;
KSecond choice: femoral vein;
KThird choice: left jugular vein;
KLast choice: subclavian vein with preference forthe dominant side.http://www.kidney-international.org chapter 5.4
&2012 KDIGO
Kidney International Supplements (2012) 2, 89–115 101
RATIONALE
Although generally associated with the lowest rate of
infectious complications, the CDC guideline as well as the
KDOQI guideline recommend avoiding the subclavian vein
for RRT access,640,641because this may lead to central vein
stenosis and jeopardize subsequent permanent access. Thisrecommendation is mainly derived from observational datain ESRD patients showing a higher incidence of central veinstenosis with subclavian than with jugular dialysis cathe-ters.
650,651On the other hand, central vein stenosis has also
been described after jugular catheterization.652,653Contact of
the catheter with the vessel wall is considered a primaryinitiating event for catheter-related thrombosis and stenosis.Catheters in the right internal jugular vein have a straightcourse into the right brachiocephalic vein and superior venacava, and, therefore, the least contact with the vessel wall. Acatheter inserted through the subclavian or the left jugularvein has one or more angulations. explaining the higher riskof vessel contact and thrombosis/stenosis with subclavian
compared to jugular catheters,
650,651and with left-sided
compared to right-sided jugular catheters.654–656The sub-
clavian vein should, therefore, be considered the last choice
for insertion of a dialysis catheter in patients with AKI,especially when the risk of nonrecovery of kidney function issubstantial. Whether this recommendation should be ex-tended to the left jugular vein remains unclear. In patientswhere the subclavian vein remains the only available option,
preference should be given to the dominant side in order to
spare the nondominant side for eventual future permanentaccess.
Because the subclavian vein should be avoided, the
remaining options are the jugular and femoral veins. Theuse of femoral catheters is thought to be associated with thehighest risk of infection, and avoidance of femoral lines ispart of many ‘‘central line bundles’’ that intend to reduce the
incidence of catheter-related bloodstream infection.
657
This dogma was questioned in a concealed, randomized,
multicenter, evaluator-blinded, parallel-group trial of 750AKI patients, comparing the femoral with the jugular site forﬁrst catheter insertion for RRT. Ultrasound was seldom used,probably explaining the somewhat higher rate of failure onone side and crossover in the jugular group. The rate ofhematoma formation was also higher in the jugular group.
In both groups, 20% of the catheters were antiseptic-
impregnated. Mean duration of catheterization was 6.2 daysfor the femoral and 6.9 days for the jugular group. The majorreasons for catheter removal were death or ‘‘no longerrequired’’ . The incidence of catheter colonization at removal(the primary end-point) was not signiﬁcantly differentbetween the femoral and jugular group. When stratiﬁedaccording to body mass index (BMI), those within the lowest
BMI tertile had a higher incidence of colonization with the
jugular site, whereas those within the highest BMI tertile hadthe highest colonization rate with femoral catheters. Blood-stream infection did not differ between the groups (2.3 per1000 catheter-days for jugular and 1.5 per 1000 catheter-daysfor femoral) but the study was not powered for this end-point. This was also the case for thrombotic complications(Suppl Table 34).
658
Malfunction is another issue that needs to be considered
when choosing between a jugular and femoral vascularaccess. Observational trials show more malfunctioning and ashorter actuarial survival for femoral than for jugular dialysiscatheters],
659–661and more malfunction with left-sided
jugular catheters compared to right-sided.662Recirculation
has been shown to be more frequent in femoral thansubclavian or jugular dialysis catheters, especially withshorter femoral catheters.
642,643A secondary analysis of the
French multicenter trial did not ﬁnd a difference in catheterdysfunction between jugular and femoral catheters in theintention-to-treat analysis. However, a separate analysis ofthe right and left jugular catheters showed a trend toward
more dysfunction with femoral than with right jugular
catheters, but signiﬁcantly more dysfunction with left jugularcompared to femoral catheters.
663
Another point to consider is that any patient who has the
option of undergoing a kidney transplantation should nothave a femoral catheter placed to avoid stenosis of the iliacvein, to which the transplanted kidney’s vein is anato-mized.
640The presence of a femoral catheter also reduces the
patient’s mobilization, especially when the RRT is contin-uous.
In summary, the right jugular vein appears to be the best
option for insertion of a dialysis catheter. Femoral cathetersare preferred over left jugular catheters because of reducedmalfunction, and the subclavian vein should only beconsidered a rescue option. It is evident that individualpatient characteristics may require deviations from this order
of preferences. Catheter insertion should be performed with
strict adherence to infection-control policies, includingmaximal sterile barrier precautions (mask, sterile gown,sterile gloves, large sterile drapes) and chlorhexidine 2% skinantisepsis.
641,664,665
5.4.3: We recommend using ultrasound guidance for
dialysis catheter insertion. ( 1A)
RATIONALE
For several decades, techniques involving the use of anatomiclandmarks have been the traditional mainstay of accessing thecentral venous system. Using the ‘‘blind’’ landmark techniqueis not without signiﬁcant morbidity and mortality. Compli-cations of central venous catheterization include arterialpuncture (0.5–6%), hematoma (0.1–4.4%), hemothorax(0.4–0.6%), pneumothorax (0.1–3.1%), and up to 10–20%of insertion attempts are not successful.
666,667In view of their
large size, the risk of complications of dialysis catheters isexpected to be even higher. Two meta-analyses haveaddressed the role of real-time two-dimensional ultrasoundfor central vein cannulation, and concluded that, comparedto the landmark method, ultrasound-guided venous access
102 Kidney International Supplements (2012) 2, 89–115chapter 5.4
increases the probability of successful catheter placement and
reduces the risk of complications, the need for multiplecatheter placement attempts, and the time required for theprocedure. The advantage appears most pronounced for thejugular vein, whereas the evidence is scarce for the subclavianand femoral vein.
668,669Subsequent large randomized trials
have conﬁrmed the superiority of ultrasound guidance.670,671
Trials evaluating the placement of dialysis catheters in ESRD
patients, mostly with observational design, yield a similar
conclusion.672–678The KDOQI guideline for vascular access
also recommends using ultrasound-assisted insertion.640
5.4.4: We recommend obtaining a chest radiograph
promptly after placement and before ﬁrst use of aninternal jugular or subclavian dialysis catheter. ( 1B)
RATIONALE
Uncuffed, nontunneled dialysis catheters are semirigid. Their
tip should not be in the heart, because of the risk of atrial
perforation and pericardial tamponade. On the other hand, aposition too high in the brachiocephalic vein, especially withsubclavian and left-sided catheters, should also be avoided,because it allows a narrow contact between the catheter tipand the vessel wall, which may result in improper catheterfunction and vessel thrombosis.
655,679,680The correct position
of the tip of a semirigid dialysis catheter is at the junction of
the superior vena cava and the right atrium, allowing the
catheter to run in parallel with the long axis of the superiorvena cava.
679Tunneled catheters are usually softer and can be
positioned into the right atrium, thus allowing a higherblood ﬂow.
680
To conﬁrm the correct position and to assess for potential
complications, a postprocedural chest radiograph is conven-tionally performed. Although this procedure has been debated
after uneventful placement of a CVC, the high blood ﬂows
used during RRT and the administration of anticoagulantsnecessitate conﬁrming the correct position before initiatingdialysis therapy.
640It should, however, be remembered that
none of the radiographic landmarks (carina, right tracheo-bronchial angle, etc) that are used to exclude intra-atrial tipposition are 100% reliable.
679,680Echocardiography might be
another tool to conﬁrm the correct position of the catheter.681
5.4.5: We suggest not using topical antibiotics over the
skin insertion site of a nontunneled dialysis cathe-ter in ICU patients with AKI requiring RRT. ( 2C)
RATIONALE
The incidence of catheter-related bloodstream infection canbe reduced by implementing education-based programs andso-called central-line bundles, that emphasize the importanceof hand hygiene, maximal barrier precautions upon inser-tion, chlorhexidine skin antisepsis, optimal catheter site
selection, and daily review of line necessity.
657For detailedinstructions on catheter care, the reader is referred to pub-
lished guidelines.640,641,664,665These guidelines also recom-
mend not using dialysis catheters for applications other thanRRT, except under emergency circumstances.
641
A recent meta-analysis of ﬁve RCTs conﬁrmed that topical
antibiotics (mainly mupirocin) reduce the risk of bacteremia,exit-site infection, need for catheter removal, and hospitali-zation for infection in ESRD patients.
682The majority of the
catheters in the included studies were tunneled. However, theCDC, National Health Service, and Infectious DiseasesSociety of America guidelines strongly recommend againsttopical antibiotic ointment for the care of CVC, because oftheir potential to promote fungal infections and antimicro-bial resistance.
641,664,665For patients with AKI that are treated
in an ICU, it seems reasonable to follow this last recommen-dation. No recommendations can be given for AKI patients
that are treated outside an ICU.
5.4.6: We suggest not using antibiotic locks for preven-
tion of catheter-related infections of nontunneled
dialysis catheters in AKI requiring RRT. ( 2C)
RATIONALE
Four meta-analyses have evaluated the efﬁcacy of variousantibiotic lock solutions in chronic dialysis patients, andconclude that they signiﬁcantly reduce catheter-related
bloodstream infection. Drawbacks are the overall moderate
trial quality and the short follow-up that does not allowexcluding the development of resistance.
682–685However, the
CDC, National Health Service, and Infectious DiseasesSociety of America guidelines strongly recommend againstroutinely using antibiotic lock solutions in CVC, because oftheir potential to promote fungal infections, antimicrobialresistance, and systemic toxicity.
641,664,665Mentioned excep-
tions are long-term cuffed and tunneled catheters withhistory of multiple catheter-related bloodstream infectionsdespite maximal adherence to aseptic technique,
641,665
patients with limited venous access and history of recurrentcatheter-related bloodstream infection, or patients withheightened risk of severe sequelae from a catheter-relatedbloodstream infection.
664
Pediatric considerations
Most of the guidelines for adults are applicable to children.Functional CRRT circuit survival in children is favored bylarger catheter size
686that should be adapted to patient size
(Table 20).687Recent data from the Prospective Pediatric
CRRT Registry group shows that internal jugular cathetersmay be associated with longer functional CRRT circuitsurvival, compared to femoral and subclavian access.
686In
addition, the Prospective Pediatric CRRT Registry groupshowed extremely poor circuit survival with two single-lumen 5 F catheters; these catheters should therefore beavoided. Future permanent access in the form of an arterio-
venous graft or ﬁstula for patients who develop CKD may be
Kidney International Supplements (2012) 2, 89–115 103chapter 5.4
compromised if acute access is placed in a subclavian vein.
Clinicians must therefore consider the potential long-termvascular needs of patients who may be expected to developCKD, especially children who have demonstrated excellentlong-term survival with CKD and ESRD.
688
Analysis of a pediatric database (1989–1999) showed
that surgically placed Tenckhoff catheters for PD induceless complications than more stiff percutaneously placedcatheters.
689A more recent retrospective analysis with
historical controls reports that, compared to the surgicallyplaced Tenckhoff catheter, using a more ﬂexible catheter forpercutaneous insertion may achieve a comparable cathetersurvival and complication rate.
690
RESEARCH RECOMMENDATIONS
KDetermine whether the initial use of a tunneled vs.nontunneled catheter for RRT in AKI patients results in abeneficial effect on catheter function and catheter-relatedcomplications, including infections and number of
additional access procedures.
KDevelop better means of predicting the need for long-
term access and better methods to select access site inindividual patients by balancing various risks andbenefits.
SUPPLEMENTARY MATERIAL
Supplementary Table 33: Summary table of RCTs examining the effect
of access placement with tunneled versus non-tunneled catheters on
AKI.Supplementary Table 34: Summary table of RCTs examining the effect
of jugular vs. femoral access placement on AKI.
Supplementary material is linked to the online version of the paper at
http://www.kdigo.org/clinical_practice_guidelines/AKI.phpTable 20 | Catheter and patient sizes
Patient size Catheter size Site of insertion
Neonate Double-lumen 7F Femoral artery or
vein
3– 6 kg Double- or triple-lumen 7F Jugular, subclavian,
or femoral
6– 30 kg Double-lumen 8F Jugular, subclavian,
or femoral
415 kg Double-lumen 9F Jugular, subclavian,
or femoral
430 kg Double-lumen 10F or
triple-lumen 12FJugular, subclavian,
or femoral
Reprinted from Bunchman TE, Brophy PD, Goldstein SL. Technical considerations for
renal replacement therapy in children. Semin Nephrol 2008; 28: 488– 492687, copyright
2008, with permission from Elsevier; accessed http://www.seminarsinnephrology.org/article/S0270-9295(08)00117-4/fulltext
104 Kidney International Supplements (2012) 2, 89–115chapter 5.4
Chapter 5.5: Dialyzer membranes for renal
replacement therapy in AKI
Semipermeable hollow-ﬁber dialyzers are used as standard
of care for both solute clearance and ultraﬁltration inIHD and CRRT circuits. Membrane composition and
clearance characteristics vary among the commercially
available dialyzers. While no RCTs exist to provide deﬁnitiverecommendations for a particular dialyzer type, the charac-teristics and potential side-effects of each dialyzer typerequire consideration.
5.5.1: We suggest to use dialyzers with a biocompatible
membrane for IHD and CRRT in patients with
AKI. ( 2C)
RATIONALE
Semipermeable hollow-ﬁber dialyzers currently represent the
standard of care for IHD or CRRT for patients with AKI. Alldialyzer membranes induce some degree of activation ofblood components, a phenomenon called bioincompati-bility.
691Earlier-generation dialyzer membranes composed of
cuprophane or unmodiﬁed cellulose were more bioincom-patible and had the potential to cause a ‘‘dialyzer membrane
reaction’’ , mediated by complement activation, release of
proinﬂammatory markers, and oxidative stress, and mani-fested clinically by acute hypotension, vasodilatation, leuco-penia, hypoxia and fever.
692–697More recently, modiﬁed
cellulosic membranes (with substitution of the hydroxylgroups) and synthetic membranes composed of polyacyl-nitrile, polysulfone, or poly(methyl methacrylate) have beendeveloped. These ‘‘biocompatible membranes’’ (or less
bioincompatible membranes) produce less complement and
cytokine activation, and decrease oxidative stress.
697,698
Recent studies suggest that platelet activation might alsobe involved in the bioincompatibility phenomenon.
698–701
Another membrane characteristic that might have clinicalimportance is the ﬂux property, with membranes generallybeing divided in low-ﬂux and high-ﬂux, the latter havinglarger pores and thus the potential to clear larger solutes.
The question of whether membrane bioincompatibility or
ﬂux has clinical relevance in the setting of AKI has been thesubject of many clinical trials. A recent meta-analysis of 10randomized or quasi-randomized controlled trials in 1100patients could not establish any advantage for biocompatibleor high-ﬂux membranes.
702Of note, the authors chose to
include modiﬁed cellulose membranes in the bioincompa-tible group, although other investigators consider modiﬁed
cellulosic membranes to be biocompatible. When comparingthe synthetic membranes to cuprophane, there was a trend
towards reduced mortality with the synthetic membranes.This meta-analysis also did not assess the side-effects of
different membrane compositions on more proximal,
temporal associations, such as acute hypotension or fever.As a result, we agree with the authors’ conclusion that the useof either a biocompatible or modiﬁed cellulose acetatemembrane appears to be appropriate.
Recent observations reveal speciﬁc potential side-effects
when using certain dialyzer membranes. Bradykinin releasesyndrome has been observed at the start of CRRT with
uncoated AN-69 membranes.
703Bradykinin release syn-
drome is characterized by acute hypotension and pulmonary
vascular congestion. The syndrome is usually self-limited andis pH-dependent, and therefore more pronounced in patientswith severe acidosis. Also, priming of the circuit with bankedblood (that is acidotic and contains a large amount of citrate,inducing hypocalcemia) may evoke bradykinin releasesyndrome. Numerous measures have been published to
prevent or mitigate this syndrome, including zero-balance
HF to normalize the banked blood pH and calcium,
704or a
bypass maneuver in which the blood prime is given to thepatient instead of the circuit, while the patient is bled on tothe circuit with the saline prime discarded.
705Finally, a form
of bradykinin release syndrome has been reported in patientsreceiving ACE-I and IHD with AN-69 membranes,
706–708
since ACE-I prevent the conversion of bradykinin and
thereby prolong the hypotensive response when acidic blood
comes in contact with the AN-69 membrane. However,others have disputed this interaction.
704,705Nevertheless,
clinicians should be aware of the potential for bradykininrelease syndrome if an uncoated AN-69 membrane isemployed for RRT, especially in acidotic patients or in thosereceiving ACE-I. Neutralizing the electronegativity of theAN-69 membrane by coating with polyethyleneimine sig-
niﬁcantly reduces bradykinin generation.
709
Whether conventional dialysis membranes are able to
affect clinical outcomes in sepsis by removal of inﬂammatory
mediators remains highly controversial. Until further evi-dence becomes available, the use of RRT to treat sepsis shouldbe considered experimental.
RESEARCH RECOMMENDATIONS
KFuture research should assess the impact of middle-molecule clearance by high-flux membranes and/or
membrane adsorption on patient outcome in sepsis.http://www.kidney-international.org chapter 5.5
&2012 KDIGO
Kidney International Supplements (2012) 2, 89–115 105
The comparator group should be patients with sepsis that
do not receive extracorporeal treatment (if no AKI) orconventional RRT (if AKI).
KThe potential impact of dialyzer membrane composition(material, flux, etc.) on outcomes in patients with AKIremains unsettled, due to the relatively small size of trials.It would be useful to conduct larger trials comparingdifferent membranes and examining patient-centeredoutcomes include survival, renal recovery, and resourceutilization.
106 Kidney International Supplements (2012) 2, 89–115chapter 5.5
Chapter 5.6: Modality of renal replacement therapy
for patients with AKI
Controversy exists as to which is the optimal RRT modality
for patients with AKI. In current clinical practice, thechoice of the initial modality for RRT is primarily basedon the availability of, and experience with, a speciﬁctreatment and on the patient’s hemodynamic status. Transi-tions between CRRT and IHD are also frequent, mostlydetermined by the hemodynamic status of the patient orcoagulation problems. Experience with PD in AKI is limited,
except in the pediatric setting and in regions with limited
resources.
5.6.1: Use continuous and intermittent RRT as comple-
mentary therapies in AKI patients. ( Not Graded )
RATIONALE
Current modalities of RRT for AKI include IHD, CRRT, and
PD. An overview of the different modalities of RRT and theircommonly used settings is given in Table 21.
Since the introduction of CRRT into clinical practice in
the early 1980 s, its use in critically ill patients with AKI hasincreased steadily.
710–712The theoretical advantages of CRRT
over IHD are the slower ﬂuid removal, resulting in morehemodynamic stability and better control of ﬂuid balance,
the slower control of solute concentration, avoiding large
ﬂuctuations and ﬂuid shifts (including a reduced risk[worsening] of cerebral edema), the great ﬂexibility (allowingadaptation of the treatment to the patient’s need at any time),and the ability to perform the treatment with relativelysimple and user-friendly machines (allowing ICU nurses tomonitor the treatment). Disadvantages include the need forimmobilization, the use of continuous anticoagulation, the
risk of hypothermia and, in some settings, higher costs.
Major advantages of IHD over CRRT are the fast removalof toxins and the restricted treatment period, allowingdown-time for diagnostic and therapeutic interventions.IHD may, therefore, be the preferred treatment in patientswhere immediate removal of small solutes is required, such assevere hyperkalemia, some cases of poisoning, and tumorlysis syndrome. Hybrid treatments, such as SLED, may sharesome of the advantages of both IHD and CRRT withouthaving their disadvantages (Table 22).
Several RCTs have compared CRRT to IHD in AKI
patients. The most inclusive meta-analysis was performed bythe Cochrane Collaboration, analyzing 15 RCTs in 1550 AKIpatients. This analysis concluded that outcomes were similarin critically ill AKI patients treated with CRRT and IHD forhospital mortality (RR 1.01; 95% CI 0.92–1.12; n ¼1245),
ICU mortality (RR 1.06; 95% CI 0.90–1.26; n ¼515), length
of hospitalization (mean deviation /C06.1; 95% CI /C026.45
to/C014.25; n ¼25), and renal recovery (free of dialysis on
discharge) in survivors (RR 0.99; 95% CI 0.92–1.07;n¼161).
713Comparable results have been reported by other
meta-analyses.714,715Individual studies used different deﬁni-
tions of AKI and were underpowered. Most of the trialsexcluded patients with hypotension or maximized efforts toimprove the hemodynamic tolerance of IHD. The high rate ofcrossover between the treatment modalities also complicates
the interpretation of the results. In addition, in some of the
trials, IHD patients were treated with bioincompatiblemembranes and studies were not standardized for treatmentdose. A subsequent RCT not included in the Cochrane meta-analyses reported similar outcomes.
716Two recent studies,
conﬁned to single geographic regions, showed reduced costswith IHD compared to CRRT.
717,718However, an analysis of
cost ranges from a multicenter, multinational observational
study found considerable heterogeneity in costs related to
IHD and CRRT, and concluded that either therapy might be
Table 21 | Typical setting of different RRT modalities for AKI (for 70-kg patient)
SCUF CVVH CVVHD CVVHDF PD SLED IHD
Blood flow (ml/min) 100–200 150–250 150–250 150–250 N/A 100–300 200–300
Predominant solute transport
principleconvection convection diffusion diffusion þconvection diffusion diffusion diffusion
Ultrafiltrate (ml/h) 100–300 1500–2000 variable 1000–1500 variable variable variable
Dialysate flow (ml/h) 0 0 1500–2000 1000–1500 1– 2 l per exchange 100– 300 ml/min 300–500 ml/min
Effluent volume (l/d) 2–8 36– 48 36– 48 36–72 24– 48 N/A N/A
Replacement fluid for zerobalance (ml/h)0 1500–2000 0 1000–1500 0 0 0
Urea clearance (ml/min) 1–5 25– 33 25– 33 25–33 variable 80–90 variable
CVVH, continuous venovenous hemofiltration; CVVHD, continuous venovenous hemodialysis, CVVHDF, continuous venovenous hemodialfiltration; IHD, intermittent
hemodialysis; N/A, not applicable; PD, peritoneal dialysis; SCUF, slow continuous ultrafiltration; SLED, slow low-efficiency dialysis.http://www.kidney-international.org chapter 5.6
&2012 KDIGO
Kidney International Supplements (2012) 2, 89–115 107
more or less costly depending on local practices, especially
stafﬁng.719
Some large observational studies, including all patients
receiving RRT, suggest that CRRT is an independent predic-tor of renal recovery among survivors.
720–722This evidence,
however, is insufﬁcient to fully elucidate the impact of choice
of therapy on this outcome. Appropriately planned prospec-
tive trials will be required to address this issue.
In conclusion, no RRT is ideal for all patients with AKI.
Clinicians should be aware of the pros and cons of differentRRTs, and tailor RRT on the basis of the individual andpotentially changing needs of their patients. Besides theindividual patient’s characteristics, the available expertise andresources may also be an important determinant of the
ultimate choice.
5.6.2: We suggest using CRRT, rather than standard
intermittent RRT, for hemodynamically unstable
patients. ( 2B)
RATIONALE
Many clinicians prefer CRRT in critically ill AKI patients withsevere hemodynamic instability, because of better hemo-dynamic tolerance due to the slower ﬂuid removal andthe absence of ﬂuid shifts induced by rapid solute removal.The Cochrane meta-analysis could not establish a differencein the number of patients with (however poorly deﬁned)hemodynamic instability (RR 0.48; 95% CI 0.10–2.28;
n¼205) nor with (variably deﬁned) hypotension (RR 0.92;95% CI 0.72–1.16; n ¼514). On the other hand, the mean
arterial pressure at the end of the treatment was signiﬁcantly
higher with CRRT than with IHD (mean deviation 5.35; 95%CI 1.41–9.29; n ¼112) and the number of patients requiring
escalation of vasopressor therapy was signiﬁcantly lowerwith CRRT compared to IHD (RR 0.49; 95% CI 0.27–0.87;
n¼149).
713In general, the number of patients included in
these analyses of the hemodynamic tolerance of RRT remains
limited, and none of the RCTs has speciﬁcally looked at theeffect of different modalities of RRT in patients with shock.
SLED has been proposed as an alternative to other forms
of RRT and is used in many centers worldwide for logisticalreasons. A recent review
723summarizes the results obtained
with SLED in several studies and discusses in detail the
technical aspects of this dialysis method. However, rando-
mized trials comparing IHD with SLED have not beenperformed. Also, clinical experience is far more limited withSLED compared to CRRT, and very few randomized studieshave compared SLED to CRRT. A ﬁrst small trial in 39 AKIpatients did not ﬁnd any difference in hemodynamics, andless need for anticoagulation with SLED compared toCRRT.
724An (even smaller) Australian study showed similar
control of urea, creatinine, and electrolytes, but a bettercontrol of acidosis and less hypotension during the ﬁrsthours of the treatment with CRRT.
725,726A recent retro-
spective analysis examined the mortality data from threegeneral ICUs in different countries that have switched theirpredominant therapeutic dialysis approach from CRRT toSLED. This change was not associated with a change inmortality.
727In addition, Fieghen et al .728examined theTable 22 | Theoretical advantages and disadvantages of CRRT, IHD, SLED, and PD
Modality Potential setting in AKI Advantages Disadvantages
IHD Hemodynamically stable Rapid removal of toxins and low-molecular-weight
substances
Allows for ‘‘down time’’ for diagnostic andtherapeutic proceduresReduced exposure to anticoagulationLower costs than CRRTHypotension with rapid fluid removalDialysis disequilibrium with risk of cerebraledemaTechnically more complex and demanding
CRRT Hemodynamically unstable
Patients at risk of increasedintracranial pressureContinuous removal of toxinsHemodynamic stabilityEasy control of fluid balanceNo treatment-induced increase of intracranialpressureUser-friendly machinesSlower clearance of toxinsNeed for prolonged anticoagulationPatient immobilizationHypothermiaIncreased costs
SLED Hemodynamically unstable Slower volume and solute removal
Hemodynamic stabilityAllows for ‘‘down time’’ for diagnostic andtherapeutic proceduresReduced exposure to anticoagulationSlower clearance of toxins
Technically more complex and demanding
PD Hemodynamically unstable
Coagulopathy
Difficult accessPatients at risk of increasedintracranial pressureUnder-resourced regionTechnically simpleHemodynamic stabilityNo anticoagulationNo need for vascular accessLower costGradual removal of toxinsPoor clearance in hypercatabolic patientsProtein lossNo control of rate of fluid removalRisk of peritonitisHyperglycemiaRequires intact peritoneal cavityImpairs diaphragmatic movement, potentialfor respiratory problems
CRRT, continuous renal replacement therapy; IHD, intermittent hemodialysis; PD, peritoneal dialysis; SLED, sustained low-efficiency dialysis.
108 Kidney International Supplements (2012) 2, 89–115chapter 5.6
relative hemodynamic tolerability of SLED and CRRT in
critically ill patients with AKI. This study also compared thefeasibility of SLED administration with that of CRRT andIHD. Relatively small cohorts of critically ill AKI patients infour critical-care units included 30 patients treated withCRRT, 13 patients with SLED, and 34 patients with IHD.Hemodynamic instability occurred during 22 (56.4%) SLEDand 43 (50.0%) CRRT sessions ( P¼0.51). In a multivariable
analysis that accounted for clustering of multiple sessionswithin the same patient, the OR for hemodynamic instabilitywith SLED was 1.20 (95% CI 0.58–2.47) compared to CRRT.Signiﬁcant session interruptions occurred in 16 (16.3%),30 (34.9%), and 11 (28.2%) of IHD, CRRT, and SLEDtherapies, respectively. This study concluded that, in criticallyill patients with AKI, the administration of SLED is feasibleand provides hemodynamic control comparable to CRRT.
In conclusion, in the presence of hemodynamic instability
in patients with AKI, CRRT is preferable to standard IHD.SLED may also be tolerated in hemodynamically unstablepatients with AKI in settings where other forms of CRRT arenot available, but data on comparative efﬁcacy and harm arelimited. Once hemodynamic stability is achieved, treatmentmay be switched to standard IHD.
5.6.3: We suggest using CRRT, rather than intermittent
RRT, for AKI patients with acute brain injury or
other causes of increased intracranial pressure orgeneralized brain edema. ( 2B)
RATIONALE
In a patient with acute brain injury, IHD may worsenneurological status by compromising cerebral perfusionpressure. This may be the result of a decrease of meanarterial pressure (dialysis-induced hypotension) or an
increase of cerebral edema and intracranial pressure (dialysis
disequilibrium), and may jeopardize the potential forneurologic recovery. Dialysis disequilibrium results fromthe rapid removal of solutes, resulting in intracellular ﬂuidshifts. Both hypotension and disequilibrium can be avoidedby the slow progressive removal of ﬂuids and solutes thatoccurs during CRRT.
729Small observational trials and case
reports in patients with intracranial pressure monitoring
indeed reported increases in intracranial pressure with
IHD.730,731Using CT scans to measure brain density, Ronco
et al.732showed an increase of brain water content after IHD,
whereas no such changes were observed after CRRT.
Protocols for decreasing hemodynamic instability with
intermittent RRT
Intradialytic hypotension is a major problem during RRT in
AKI patients, limiting its efﬁcacy and causing morbidity.
Surprisingly, there are only a few studies assessing this highlyrelevant clinical problem. Paganini et al .
733performed a
small-sample (10 subjects) randomized crossover controlledtrial in AKI patients. They evaluated two different RRTprotocols: ﬁxed dialysate sodium (140 mEq) and ﬁxed ultra-ﬁltration rate vs. variable dialysate sodium (160 to 140 mEq)and variable ultraﬁltration rate (50% in ﬁrst third of thetreatment and 50% in the last two-thirds of the treatment).The variable sodium and ultraﬁltration rate protocolachieved better hemodynamic stability, needed fewer inter-ventions, and induced lesser relative blood volume changes,despite higher ultraﬁltration rates.
Schortgen et al.
734evaluated the effects of implementing
speciﬁc guidelines aiming to improve IHD hemodynamictolerance. The clinical practice algorithm included primingthe dialysis circuit with isotonic saline, setting dialysatesodium concentration at 145 mEq/l, discontinuing vasodi-lator therapy, and setting dialysate temperature to below371C. A total of 289 RRT sessions were performed in 76
patients and compared to a historical series of 248 sessions in
45 patients. Hemodynamic tolerance was better in the
guideline patients. They developed less systolic drop at andduring RRT. They also had less hypotensive episodes and theneed for therapeutic interventions was less frequent. Theadoption of guidelines did not inﬂuence ICU mortality, butdeath rate was signiﬁcantly lower than predicted from illnessseverity in the guideline patients, but not in the historicalseries subjects. Length of ICU stay was also reduced for
survivors in the protocol-oriented group, as compared to the
historical series of patients.
Peritoneal dialysis
In the developing world, the development of CRRTtechniques has resulted in a substantial decline in theexpertise with, and use of, PD for treatment of AKI. Theuse of PD in AKI is mainly conﬁned to pediatrics and inregions with limited resources, because of its ease of use, lowcost, and minimal requirements on infrastructure. Otheradvantages include the lack of a need for vascular access and
anticoagulation, the absence of a disequilibrium syndrome
and the relatively good hemodynamic tolerance compared toIHD. Disadvantages are the overall lower effectiveness(especially in patients with splanchnic hypoperfusion orwho are on vasopressors), the risk of protein loss, theunpredictability of solute and ﬂuid removal, the need for anintact peritoneal cavity, risk of peritonitis, diaphragmaticsplinting leading to ventilatory compromise and ﬂuctuating
blood glucose levels. Recent developments in the technique of
PD (use of ﬂexible and cuffed catheters, automatic cycling,and continuous ﬂow PD) have increased its potential tobecome an acceptable alternative to other forms of RRT inAKI,
735–737but direct comparative effectiveness trials are
extremely limited. Earlier reports on PD in AKI are mainlyuncontrolled observations. Only two relatively recent rando-mized trials have compared PD to other modalities of RRT in
AKI. Phu randomized 70 patients with septic AKI to PD or
continuous venovenous hemoﬁltration (CVVH) and founda better survival with CVVH. However, the PD treat-ment appeared not to be ‘‘up to date’’ with use of a rigidcatheter, manual exchanges with open drainage and acetate
Kidney International Supplements (2012) 2, 89–115 109chapter 5.6
buffering.738The second trial compared daily IHD to high-
volume PD (with Tenckhoff catheter and automated cycler)
and showed no difference in survival or recovery of kidneyfunction. The duration of RRT was signiﬁcantly shorter in thePD group (Suppl Table 35).
739However, this trial has not
been published in a peer-reviewed journal and the randomi-zation process is unclear. Currently indications for PD inpatients with AKI may include bleeding diathesis, hemo-
dynamic instability and difﬁculty in obtaining a vascular
access. Extremely high catabolism, severe respiratory failure,severe ileus, intra-abdominal hypertension, recent abdominalsurgery and diaphragmatic peritoneum-pleura connectionsare contraindications to PD.
Pediatric considerations
RRT modality choice for children with AKI is guided by manyof the same principles used for adult patients. However, sincesevere AKI is relatively rare in children compared to adults,occurring in less than 1% of hospitalized children
740and only
4.5% of children admitted to an intensive care unit,741the
impact of local expertise and resource restrictions may begreater for pediatric acute RRT modality decisions. As notedbelow, each modality of acute RRT can be successfullyprovided to pediatric patients of all sizes. Thus, with rareexception driven by medical indication or contraindication,no form of acute RRT can be recommended above another atthe present time. Each program should evaluate which
modality is provided most optimally and feasibly in its
particular setting.
Provision of RRT as IHD, PD, or CRRT is now a mainstay
of treatment for the child with severe AKI. The widelyvarying size range of pediatric patients imparts technicalconsiderations in selection of a modality. Given their smallsize and associated low blood volume, PD may provide theleast technically challenging option for infants and small
children. However, technological advances aimed at provid-
ing accurate ultraﬁltration with volumetric control incorpo-rated into IHD and CRRT equipment, and disposable lines,circuits, and dialyzers sized for the entire pediatric weightspectrum have made IHD and CRRT safer and feasible forchildren of all ages and sizes.
570,742–744Transition from theuse of adaptive CRRT equipment to production of high-ﬂowmachines with volumetric control allowing for accurateultraﬁltration ﬂows has likewise lead to a change in pediatricRRT modality prevalence patterns in the USA. Accurateultraﬁltration and blood ﬂow rates are crucial for pediatricRRT, since the extracorporeal circuit volume can comprisemore than 15% of a small pediatric patient’s total bloodvolume, and small ultraﬁltration inaccuracies may represent a
large percentage of a small pediatric patient’s total body
water. Polls of USA pediatric nephrologists demonstrateincreased CRRT use over PD as the preferred modality fortreating pediatric ARF. In 1995, 45% of pediatric centersranked PD and 18% ranked CRRT as the most commonmodality used for initial ARF treatment. In 1999, 31% ofcenters chose PD vs. 36% of centers reported CRRT as theirprimary initial modality for ARF treatment.
745
In the 1990 s, survival rates stratiﬁed by RRT modality were
better for children receiving IHD (73– 89%) than those receivingPD (49–64%) or CRRT (34– 42%).
545,746However, this analysis
did not correct for illness severity. More recent data demon-strate much improved survival in children receivingCRRT,
543,544,546,570with survival rates ranging from 50–70%
for children with multiple-organ dysfunction who receiveCRRT. While no RCT exists to assess the impact of CRRT
modality on survival, convective modalities were associated with
increased survival in children with stem-cell transplants in aprospective cohort study (59% vs. 27%, Po0.05).
747
RESEARCH RECOMMENDATIONS
KLarge RCTs should compare SLED against other forms ofRRT in patients with AKI. These trials should bestandardized for treatment dose, buffer, membrane,anticoagulant, and timing of treatment.
KThe effects of different modalities of RRT on the long-term need for chronic dialysis, along with mortality,
should be evaluated in prospective randomized trials.
SUPPLEMENTARY MATERIAL
Supplementary Table 35: Summary table of RCTs examining the effect
of dialysis modality (continuous vs. intermittent RRT) in AKI.
Supplementary material is linked to the online version of the paper at
http://www.kdigo.org/clinical_practice_guidelines/AKI.php
110 Kidney International Supplements (2012) 2, 89–115chapter 5.6
Chapter 5.7: Buffer solutions for renal replacement
therapy in patients with AKI
One goal of CRRT is to maintain normal or near-normal
acid-base balance, thus preventing detrimental effects ofacidosis on cardiovascular performance and hormonalresponse. Options for correction of metabolic acidosisinclude the use of acetate-, lactate-, and bicarbonate-containing replacement solutions or dialysate. Some centersuse citrate anticoagulation, and the citrate load provides an
adequate supply of anionic base to control metabolic
acidosis. Dialysate solutions for IHD are produced on-lineby the dialysis machine, by mixing specially treatedmunicipal water with electrolytes. Dialysate or replacementsolutions for CRRT are produced commercially or locally inhospital pharmacies.
5.7.1: We suggest using bicarbonate, rather than lactate,
as a buffer in dialysate and replacement ﬂuid for
RRT in patients with AKI. ( 2C)
5.7.2: We recommend using bicarbonate, rather than
lactate, as a buffer in dialysate and replacementﬂuid for RRT in patients with AKI and circulatoryshock. ( 1B)
5.7.3: We suggest using bicarbonate, rather than lactate,
as a buffer in dialysate and replacement ﬂuid for
RRT in patients with AKI and liver failure and/or
lactic acidemia. ( 2B)
RATIONALE
Options for correction of metabolic acidosis in patients withAKI include acetate, lactate, bicarbonate, and citrate. The useof acetate has been largely abandoned in view of the
associated hemodynamic instability and weight loss, probably
related to excessive nitric oxide production and cytokinesynthesis.
748Citrate, used for regional anticoagulation of the
extracorporeal circuit, is alkalinizing, and most patientsreceiving citrate anticoagulation do not need an additionalbuffer in the dialysate or replacement ﬂuid.
Original HF solutions contained lactate as a buffer. Under
normal circumstances, this lactate is metabolized, resulting in
adequate correction of acidosis in most patients. A survey in
34 Australian ICUs concluded that 55% of the ICU patientswith AKI were treated with lactate-based solutions
710that, in
most countries, are less expensive than bicarbonate solutions.In addition, bicarbonate solutions have a higher risk ofbacterial contamination and the solution is unstable in thepresence of calcium and magnesium. However, in recentyears, bicarbonate has gained popularity because of concernsthat lactate may not be rapidly metabolized in the setting ofmultiple-organ failure.
749Since lactate is a strong anion,
insufﬁcient lactate conversion will result in worseningacidosis, especially since bicarbonate losses are ongoing inthe extracorporeal circuit. Hyperlactatemia has also beenlinked to impaired cellular function and catabolism due tolowering of the cellular redox state and phosphorylation
potential.
750In addition, iatrogenic increases in lactate levels
may lead to misinterpretation of the clinical situation. The
risk of ‘‘lactate intolerance’’ is highest in patients with liverfailure (impaired lactate clearance) or circulatory shock(increased endogenous lactate production).
Few adequately designed trials have compared different
buffers during RRT in AKI patients, and most of them havebeen performed during CRRT. Barenbrock et al.
751rando-
mized 117 AKI patients to CVVH with lactate or bicarbonatereplacement ﬂuid. The use of bicarbonate resulted in bettercorrection of acidosis and lower lactate levels. Also, theincidence of hypotension and other cardiovascular events waslower with bicarbonate. In the subgroup of patients withcardiac failure, mortality tended to be lower with bicarbo-nate, whereas in the subgroup of septic patents no differencein outcome was found (Suppl Table 36). A nonrandomized
crossover study in 54 patients with multiple-organ dysfunc-
tion undergoing CVVHDF conﬁrmed the superior control ofacidosis and better hemodynamic tolerance with bicarbo-nate.
752However, another RCT in 40 patients treated with
CVVH could not ﬁnd a difference in hemodynamictolerance, despite the higher lactate levels in the lactate-buffered group.
753Differences in the case-mix may explain
these different results.
Two small prospective randomized crossover comparisons
of bicarbonate- and lactate-buffered solutions in AKI patientstreated with CVVH or CVVHDF found elevated serumlactate levels with lactate, an effect that was more pronouncedin patients with hepatic insufﬁciency.
754,755An observational
trial in 27 patients found a compromised lactate tolerance inpatients with coincidental liver disease, those on inotropicsupport, and in patients with initial blood lactate measure-
ments of 490.1 mg/dl ( 410 mmol/l) and large base
deﬁcits.
756
In conclusion, the use of bicarbonate as a buffer in the
dialysate or replacement ﬂuid of AKI patients results in better
correction of acidosis, lower lactate levels, and improvedhemodynamic tolerance. This effect is most pronounced inpatients with circulatory problems and in those with liverdysfunction.http://www.kidney-international.org chapter 5.7
&2012 KDIGO
Kidney International Supplements (2012) 2, 89–115 111
5.7.4: We recommend that dialysis ﬂuids and replacement
ﬂuids in patients with AKI, at a minimum, comply
with American Association of Medical Instrumen-tation (AAMI) standards regarding contaminationwith bacteria and endotoxins. ( 1B)
RATIONALE
Replacement ﬂuids for HF or HDF are infused directly into
the patient’s circulation and should be sterile. A potential
major step forward in acute RRT, reducing the costs and theneed for storage of ﬂuids, is the on-line production ofreplacement ﬂuids, which is achieved by passing water and/ordialysate through two or three ultraﬁlters before beinginfused.
757,758On-line production of replacement ﬂuids has
not yet been approved by the FDA or by some regulatoryauthorities in Europe.
Conventional IHD uses nonsterile dialysate, as there is no
direct contact between blood and dialysate. However, with theuse of high-permeability membranes, the lower blood sidepressures at the end of the dialyzer ﬁlter may allow back-ﬁltration of dialysate to the blood,
759raising the possibility of
endotoxin or other contaminant exposure. Two studiesconﬁrmed microbial contamination of (locally prepared andcommercial) ﬂuids and circuitry during CRRT.
760,761Dialysate
for CRRT should preferably be ultrapure, and should at leastcomply with quality standards for dialysis water and dialysisﬂuids that may differ worldwide (Table 23).
762
Finally, an international quality standard for dialysis ﬂuid
is in preparation by the International Society for Standardi-
zation. Until international standards are in place, we
recommend that dialysis ﬂuids and replacement ﬂuids inpatients with AKI, at a minimum, comply with AAMIstandards for bacteria and endotoxins. When local standardsexceed AAMI standards, local standards should be followed(Table 23).
RESEARCH RECOMMENDATION
KFurther studies are required to explore the impact of on-line preparation of replacement fluid for HDF on clinicaloutcomes (incidence of sepsis, renal recovery, mortality)
in AKI patients requiring RRT.
SUPPLEMENTARY MATERIAL
Supplementary Table 36: Summary table of RCTs examining the effect
of bicarbonate vs. lactate as buffer for CVVH replacement fluid on
acidosis in AKI.
Supplementary material is linked to the online version of the paper at
http://www.kdigo.org/clinical_practice_guidelines/AKI.phpTable 23 | Microbiological quality standards of different regulatory agencies
ANSI/AAMI/ISO763– 765ERA-EDTA guidelines765a
Water for dialysis
Bacteria (CFU/ml) o100 (action level at 50) o100
Endotoxin (EU/ml) o0.5 o0.25
Dialysate
Bacteria (CFU/ml) o100 (action level at 50) o100
Endotoxin (EU/ml) o0.5 o0.25
Ultrapure dialysate
Bacteria (CFU/ml) o0.1 o0.1
Endotoxin (EU/ml) o0.03 o0.03
Substitution fluid for infusion
Bacteria (CFU/ml) Sterile o10/C06
Endotoxin (EU/ml) Undetectable o0.03
AAMI, Association for the Advancement of Medical Instrumentation; ANSI, American National Standards Institute; CFU, colony-forming units; ERA-E DTA, European Renal
Association—European Dialysis and Transplant Asssociation; EU, endotoxin units; ISO, International Organization for Standardization.
112 Kidney International Supplements (2012) 2, 89–115chapter 5.7
Chapter 5.8: Dose of renal replacement therapy in AKI
The ﬁrst report of RRT in AKI was published in 1965.766
Despite more than six decades of clinical experience and
research, controversy remains about the best way to measureand what constitutes optimal dose of RRT for patients withAKI. Indeed, three of the top ﬁve questions considered most
relevant by an international expert’s panel on RRT delivery in
AKI were about dose.
767
The methods used for RRT dose quantiﬁcation in AKI
have several limitations, and have not been fully validated inthis speciﬁc population. Earlier single-center trials assessingthe effects of RRT dose in AKI provided conﬂictingresults.
531,768–772Considering the complexity of AKI patients,
RRT dose, by itself, may have less impact on mortality both
in patients with very high or very low chance of surviving,
but may be most important in patients with intermediatescores of disease severity.
773In addition, it is possible that
dose and timing are closely linked factors, i.e., a high RRTdose may not work adequately if provided late, or an earlyRRT starting may not be able to change outcomes if the doseis not optimized. Currently, only one small RCT consideredboth variables at the same time.
531
5.8.1: The dose of RRT to be delivered should be
prescribed before starting each session of RRT.(Not Graded ) We recommend frequent assessment
of the actual delivered dose in order to adjust theprescription. ( 1B)
5.8.2: Provide RRT to achieve the goals of electrolyte,
acid-base, solute, and ﬂuid balance that will meet
the patient’s needs. ( Not Graded )
RATIONALE
The judgment and awareness of how much of a particular
therapeutic procedure should be, and actually it is, deliveredis essential for a good medical practice. However, recentsurveys have shown a disappointingly low number ofphysicians that report being aware of, or calculating, RRTdose in AKI.
774
Although widely used for evaluation of RRT in CKD, Kt/V
urea has important limitations as a tool for RRT dosing in
AKI. AKI patients are metabolically unstable, with variations
in urea generation. In addition, their urea volume ofdistribution appears to exceed the patient’s total body-watervolume.
775Different ways to measure Kt/V obtained
signiﬁcantly different results in AKI patients.776In the same
way, the selection of a target serum urea level as an indicatorof dialysis dose is highly arbitrary, as serum urea is inﬂuencedby several extrarenal factors, such as ethnicity, age, gender,nutrition, presence of liver disease, sepsis, muscle injury,drugs, etc.
Several clinical investigations have shown that the actual
delivered dose of RRT in AKI patients is frequently smallerthan the prescribed dose, and even smaller than the
recommended minimum for CKD patients.
771,773,776–778
Impediments to adequate dose delivery were hemodynamic
instability, patient size, access problems, technical problems,need for patient transportation, and early ﬁlter clotting.
Trials studying dose in CRRT have used the amount
of efﬂuent volume normalized by the patient’s weightand procedure time as a parameter for dose evaluation.However, the actual efﬂuent ﬂow will be inﬂuenced by
interruptions of CRRT, and efﬂuent ﬂow will exceed actual
dose with use of predilution or with reductions in mem-brane permeability during the treatment. In summary, it isessential to check very carefully if the prescribed RRT doseis really being delivered to AKI patients. Increasing ﬁltersize, dialysis time, blood ﬂow rate, dialysate ﬂow rate, and/orefﬂuent ﬂow rate should be considered in case of doseinadequacy.
In determining a prescription of RRT it is mandatory to
consider parameters other than small-solute clearance, suchas patients’ ﬂuid balance, acid-base and electrolyte home-ostasis, and nutrition, among others, as possible componentsof an optimal RRT dose. In fact, positive ﬂuid balanceappears to be an independent risk factor for mortality in AKIpatients.
83
5.8.3: We recommend delivering a Kt/V of 3.9 per week
when using intermittent or extended RRT inAKI. ( 1A)
5.8.4: We recommend delivering an efﬂuent volume of
20–25 ml/kg/h for CRRT in AKI (1A). This will
usually require a higher prescription of efﬂuentvolume. ( Not Graded )
RATIONALE
Three RCTs evaluated the dose of IHD in AKI (Suppl Tables37 and 38). Schifﬂ et al.
771compared daily to alternate-day
IHD in 146 ICU patients with AKI. RRT was started withrather high values of SCr (over 4.5 mg/dl [398 mmol/l]) and
BUN (around 90 mg/dl [32.1 mmol/l urea]). The daily armreceived a weekly Kt/V approximately two times higher thanthe alternate-day arm (5.8 ±0.6 vs. 3 ±0.6, respectively).
Daily IHD resulted in lower mortality (28% vs. 46%,P¼0.01) and faster recovery of kidney function (9 ±2 vs.
16±6 days, P¼0.001). Major limitations of this study werehttp://www.kidney-international.org chapter 5.8
&2012 KDIGO
Kidney International Supplements (2012) 2, 89–115 113
inadequate randomization, a ‘‘very low dose’’ in the control
group (actually less than that recommended for CKD). Alsooverall mortality in the study (34%) was lower than in otherstudies in this population, suggesting that the results may notgeneralize. Moreover, alternate-day IHD was associated withsigniﬁcant differences in ﬂuid removal and dialysis-associatedhypotension, suggesting that aspects other than solutecontrol might modify patient outcomes.
The Veterans Affairs/National Institutes of Health Acute
Renal Failure Trial Network (ARFTN) study
563was a RCT
assessing the effects of intensive compared to less-intensiveRRT in 1124 ICU patients with AKI in 27 Veterans Affairs–and university-afﬁliated North-American centers. Withineach randomization arm patients were switched betweenIHD and CRRT or SLED, based on their hemodynamicstatus, reﬂecting average clinical practice in the USA.
Intermittent treatments were prescribed at a Kt/V of 1.4,
with a delivered Kt/V averaging 1.3, and were performedthree (less-intensive arm) or six (more-intensive arm) timesper week. Consequently, the weekly Kt/V was approximately6.5 in the intensive and 3.9 in the less-intensive arm.Mortality at 60 days was similar in both groups (53.6% and51.5%) as was the percentage of patients recovering kidneyfunction (15.4% and 18.4%). Limitations of this study
include the predominance of males, and the nonstandardized
timing for initiating RRT. In addition, a signiﬁcantly higherfrequency of hypotension and electrolyte disturbances wereseen in the more-intensive arm. Similar to what has beenreported in chronic dialysis, acute IHD results in under-dosing when Kt/V is not measured. In the ARFTN study, theﬁrst session of IHD had an average delivery of 1.1 Kt/V, whilethe prescribed dose was 1.4.
The Hannover Dialysis Outcome Study
768randomized
148 ICU patients with AKI to two different doses of SLED: astandard-dialysis arm dosed to maintain plasma urea levelsbetween 120–150 mg/dl (20–25 mmol/l), or an intensiﬁed-dialysis arm dosed to maintain plasma urea levels o90 mg/dl
(o15 mmol/l). Patients were included with SCr around
3 mg/dl (265 mmol/l) and plasma urea around 60 mg/dl
(10 mmol/l). The mean plasma urea was kept at 68 ±
24 mg/dl (11.3 ±4 mmol/l) in the intensiﬁed and 114 ±
36 mg/dl (19 ±6 mmol/l) in the standard group. Mortality
at 28 days was not statistically different between groups(38.7% and 44.4%) and the frequency of survivors recoveringkidney function at day 28 was very similar (63% and 60%).
In CKD, the analysis by Gotch and Sargent
779of the
National Cooperative Dialysis Study showed that survivalcould be increased by increasing Kt/V to 1.0–1.2. Analysis of a
large database of 2311 Medicare IHD patients also showed a
strong association between the delivered IHD dose andmortality, with a decreased mortality risk of 7% for each 0.1higher level of delivered Kt/V in CKD patients. However,above a Kt/V of 1.3, no further decrease in mortality wasnoted.
780The HEMO study, a large RCT comparing two
different dialysis doses in CKD, also could not demonstrate afurther reduction of mortality with equilibrated Kt/V of 1.43compared to 1.16.
781If we assume that AKI patients should
receive at least the same dose as CKD patients, it seemsreasonable to recommend a thrice-weekly Kt/V of 1.3 or aweekly Kt/V of 3.9 (assuming at least thrice-weeklytreatment), which also represents the lowest dose in thelargest randomized trial in AKI (ARFTN study). Whetherspeciﬁc subgroups of AKI patients, such as those withhypercatabolism, may beneﬁt from higher doses will require
further investigation.
In conclusion, there are only two adequately designed and
executed RCTs testing intermittent or extended RRT dose in
AKI. Neither study showed improvement in mortality or renalrecovery when the dialysis dose was increased, either byincreasing Kt/V above 3.9 weekly or by achieving a plasma ureatarget below 90 mg/dl (15 mmol/l) in AKI patients. However,consistent with the data on dose of IHD in CKD, and consistent
with the lower-dose arm in the ARFTN study, we recommend
thrice-weekly Kt/V of 1.3 or a weekly Kt/V of 3.9 for IHD in AKI.
Seven RCTs have investigated the role of CRRT dose in
AKI (Suppl Tables 37 and 38).
531,562,563,768–770,772While
earlier single-center trials showed mixed results, two largemulticenter trials have reached remarkably consistent con-clusions concerning the dose of CRRT that should beprovided to critically ill patients with AKI.
The ARFTN study
563compared standard-intensity
predilution CVVHDF with a prescribed efﬂuent ﬂow of20 ml/kg/h to high-intensity CVVHDF at 35 ml/kg/h. As dis-cussed in Recommendation 5.8.3 rationale, there were nodifferences in outcomes between the two study arms.Importantly, more than 95% of the prescribed dose of CRRTwas delivered in the less-intensive group. This represents aconsiderably greater intensity of delivered dose than is
typically seen in clinical practice. As in chronic dialysis,
studies in CRRT have shown that delivery usually fallssubstantially short of the prescribed dose.
782Thus, it will
usually be necessary to prescribe a high dose of CRRT inorder to achieve a speciﬁc target. For example, in order toachieve a delivered dose of 20–25 ml/kg/h, it is likely that theprescription will need to be in the range of 25–30 ml/kg/h.The Randomized Evaluation of Normal vs. Augmented Level
of RRT study was conducted in 35 centers in Australia and
New Zealand.
562It compared the effects of postdilution
CVVHDF at doses of 25 and 40 ml/kg/h on 28- and 90-daymortality rates in 1464 AKI patients. The delivered dose was88% and 84% of prescribed in the low- and high-dosegroups, respectively. As in the ARFTN study, there was nodifference in 28- or 90-day mortality between the two groups.Apart from a higher incidence of hypophosphatemia in the
high-dose group, the complication rate was similar.
562
In conclusion, there are now consistent data from two
large multicenter trials showing no beneﬁts of increa-
sing CRRT doses in AKI patients above efﬂuent ﬂows of20–25 ml/kg/h. In clinical practice, in order to achieve adelivered dose of 20–25 ml/kg/h, it is generally necessary toprescribe in the range of 25–30 ml/kg/h, and to minimizeinterruptions in CRRT.
114 Kidney International Supplements (2012) 2, 89–115chapter 5.8
Additional considerations
In patients who do not achieve the target dose of RRT,
despite optimization of the initial modality, a switch toanother modality or the combination of different modalitiesshould be considered.
Although there are insufﬁcient data supporting a
recommendation for elevated RRT doses in patients withAKI and septic shock, limited data suggest that a higher
dose might be beneﬁcial in some patients. A small single-
center RCT was conducted in 20 patients with septic shockand AKI. Patients were randomized to either high-volume (efﬂuent ﬂow of 65 ml/kg/h) or low-volume CVVH(efﬂuent ﬂow of 35 ml/kg/h). The primary end-point wasvasopressor dose required to maintain mean arterial pressureat 65 mm Hg. Mean norepinephrine dose decreased morerapidly after 24 hours of high-volume as compared to
low-volume CVVH treatment. Survival on day 28 was not
affected.
783
RESEARCH RECOMMENDATIONS
KDetermine the optimal dose parameter that should be
used in future trials comparing different intensities ofdialysis in AKI patients. Some possible methods toexplore are on-line Kt/V urea, urea reduction ratios, orapplication of the concept of corrected equivalent renalurea clearance for solute removal measurement andultrafiltration effluent volume, or substitution fluidvolume normalized by body weight and time for CRRT.Other aspects of intensity should also be studied, e.g.,
fluid control and acid-base and electrolyte balance. The
comparators might be the standard ways to measure doseas Kt/V or prescribed effluent volume. Suggested outcomeparameters are 60- to 90-day mortality, ICU and hospitalLOS, and recovery of kidney function.
KDetermine the optimal dose of RRT in AKI in homo-
geneous subpopulations , such as cardiac surgery or sepsis
patients, and separately in ICU and non-ICU patients.
Future RCTs should be controlled for timing of RRT
initiation and, perhaps, for general care of patients(antibiotics, nutrition, kind and indication for vasoactivedrugs, mode of mechanical ventilation). Studies shouldalso assess the efficiency of RRT (since dose does notnecessarily mean efficiency), assessing control of BUN,creatinine, fluid balance, and acid-base and electrolytestatus. The comparators might be different efficiencytargets. The suggested outcomes are 60- to 90-day morta-lity, need for vasopressor drugs, time on mechanicalventilation, ICU and hospital stay, and renal recovery.
SPONSORSHIP
KDIGO gratefully acknowledges the following sponsors thatmake our initiatives possible: Abbott, Amgen, Belo Founda-tion, Coca-Cola Company, Dole Food Company, Genzyme,
Hoffmann-LaRoche, JC Penney, NATCO—The Organization
for Transplant Professionals, NKF—Board of Directors,Novartis, Robert and Jane Cizik Foundation, Shire,Transwestern Commercial Services, and Wyeth. KDIGO issupported by a consortium of sponsors and no funding isaccepted for the development of speciﬁc guidelines.
DISCLAIMER
While every effort is made by the publishers, editorial board,and ISN to see that no inaccurate or misleading data, opinionor statement appears in this Journal, they wish to make itclear that the data and opinions appearing in the articles and
advertisements herein are the responsibility of the contri-
butor, copyright holder, or advertiser concerned. Accord-ingly, the publishers and the ISN, the editorial board andtheir respective employers, ofﬁce and agents accept noliability whatsoever for the consequences of any suchinaccurate or misleading data, opinion or statement. Whileevery effort is made to ensure that drug doses and otherquantities are presented accurately, readers are advised that
new methods and techniques involving drug usage, and
described within this Journal, should only be followed inconjunction with the drug manufacturer’s own publishedliterature.
SUPPLEMENTARY MATERIAL
Supplementary Table 37: Evidence profile of RCTs examining the effect
of dose of continuous and intermittent RRT on AKI.
Supplementary Table 38: Summary table of RCTs examining the effect
of dose of continuous and intermittent RRT on AKI.
Supplementary material is linked to the online version of the paper at
http://www.kdigo.org/clinical_practice_guidelines/AKI.php
Kidney International Supplements (2012) 2, 89–115 115chapter 5.8
Biographic and Disclosure Information
Kidney International Supplements (2012) 2,116– 121; doi:10.1038/kisup.2011.36
John A Kellum, MD, FCCM, FACP (Work Group Co-Chair) ,
is Professor of Critical Care Medicine, Medicine, Bio-
engineering and Clinical and Translational Science, and ViceChair for Research within the Department of Critical CareMedicine at the University of Pittsburgh. In addition, he isthe Director of the Program on Bioengineering and Organ
Support for the CRISMA (Clinical Research Investigation
and Systems Modeling of Acute Illness) Center at theUniversity of Pittsburgh.
Dr Kellum is actively involved in education, research, and
administration. His research interests span various aspectsof critical-care medicine, but center in critical-care nephro-logy, sepsis, multiorgan failure, and clinical epidemiology,including consensus development and research methodology.
He has authored more than 300 publications and served as
editor and contributor to recent texts including Continuous
Renal Replacement Therapy ,Critical Care Nephrology , and
Management of Acute Kidney Problems . Dr Kellum has won
several awards for teaching and has given more than 400seminars and invited lectures worldwide related to hisresearch.
Advisor/Consultant: Abbott; Alere; Astute Medical; Baxter;
CytoSorbents; EBI; Eli Lilly; Fresenius; Gambro; Siemens;
Spectral DiagnosticsSpeaker: Baxter; Fresenius; GambroGrant/Research Support: Astute Medical; Baxter; CytoSorbents;Gambro
Norbert Lameire, MD, PhD (Work Group Co-Chair) ,i s
Professor of Internal Medicine and former Chief of Renal
Division at the University of Ghent where he also received his
medical degree and PhD. Dr Lameire’s interests include basicresearch topics such as renal circulation in experimental ARFand peritoneal circulation, as well as clinical topics spanningclinical ARF, PD, and organizational and economic aspectsof chronic RRT and transplantation. He currently overseesthe worldwide continuing medical education programs ofCOMGAN of the International Society of Nephrology, and
serves as current Editor-in-Chief for Acta Clinica Belgica
and is emeritus Editor-in-Chief for Nephrology Dialysis
Transplantation . For his activities in the Renal Sister Program
of the International Society of Nephrology and his leadership
of the Renal Disaster Relief Task Force, he was awardedDoctor Honoris Causa at the Kaunas Medical Academy inLithuania and an honorary membership of the InternationalSociety of Nephrology (ISN). Dr Lameire also received the
Garabed Eknoyan Award from the NKF (USA) in 2007 for his
continuing work to improve dialysis therapy and PD, and hiscontributions to improving and implementing KDOQIGuidelines. He also served as the KDIGO Co-Chair from2004 to 2007.
Dr Lameire reported no relevant ﬁnancial relationships.
Peter Aspelin, MD, PhD , received his basic training in
radiology at Malmo ¨University Hospital (Lund University)
and was Associate Professor there for 13 years. In 1989 hebecame Professor and Chairman of the Department ofRadiology at Karolinska Institutet, Huddinge UniversityHospital. Professor Aspelin was Vice Dean of the MedicalSchool at Karolinska Institutet from 1993 to 1995 and servedas Vice President at the institution from 1995 to 2001. He wasalso Head of Research & Development at Huddinge
University Hospital in 2002 and Vice Chairman of Research
& Development at the Karolinska University Hospital. Othernotable accomplishments also include his roles as Presidentfor the Scientiﬁc Board of the Swedish Council of T echnologyAssessment in Health Care (1999– 2005); Chairman of theSwedish Society of Medical Radiology (2003– 2005); and pastVice Chairman and current Chairman of the SwedishMedical Association.
Professor Aspelin has conducted research on contrast
media since 1972 when he studied under the tutelage ofProfessor Torsten Alme ´n. He has written more than 170
scientiﬁc publications to date and his primary researchcenters on the development of nonionic contrast media andthe examination of their effects on medical imaging andpatient safety.
Speaker: GE Healthcare
Expert witness: GE Healthcare
Rashad S Barsoum, MD, FRCP, FRCPE , is Emeritus
Professor of Medicine at Cairo University and current
Chairman of Cairo Kidney Center and Medical SectorCommittee for Supreme Council for Egyptian Universities.He received his medical degree from Cairo University, wherehe also completed his fellowship in nephrology in 1967.
Dr Barsoum has been a primary investigator in clinical trials
involving the study of immunosuppression agents in kidneytransplantation and treatment of HCV infection in dialysispatients. He has also authored more than 200 journal articlesand book chapters and currently serves as Associate EditorforNephron Clinical Practice and editorial board member for
American Journal of Kidney Diseases . Dr Barsoum is also
active in numerous medical societies, having served as Past
President for the Arab Society of Nephrology and Renal
Transplantation and Egyptian Society of Nephrology. Amongbiographic and disclosure information http://www.kidney-international.org
&2012 KDIGO
116 Kidney International Supplements (2012) 2, 116–121
his noted achievements include the International Award from
the NKF (USA), the Roscoe Robinson Award from theInternational Society of Nephrology, and the DistinguishedResearcher Award from Cairo University.
Advisor/Consultant: WyethSpeaker: Amgen; B. Braun; Fresenius; Janssen Cilag;Novartis; Roche; Wyeth
Emmanuel A Burdmann, MD, PhD ,i sH e a do fI n t e n s i v eC a r e
Unit and Associate Professor, Division of Nephrology atUniversity of Sa ˜o Paulo Medical School. He received his
medical degree from the University of Sa ˜o Paulo, where he also
completed his fellowship. He was the Past President of theLatin American Society of Nephrology and Hypertension andcurrent President of Brazilian Society of Nephrology. DrBurdmann has authored over 150 journal articles and book
chapters and is currently on the editorial boards of Clinical
Journal of the American Society of Nephrology ,Clinical
Nephrology ,Kidney International ,Nephrology Dialysis Trans-
plantation ,a n d Nephron Clinical Practice . He is also a member
of numerous professional societies and has served on the
Council of the International Society of Nephrology andKDIGO Board. In addition to his research interest in AKI,Dr Burdmann is also a coinvestigator in the TREAT study.
Dr Burdmann reported no relevant ﬁnancial relationships.
Stuart L Goldstein, MD , is Professor of Pediatrics and Director,
Center for Acute Care Nephrology at Cincinnati Children’sHospital Medical Center. He received his medical degree fromColumbia University and completed both clinical and researchfellowships in pediatric nephrology at the Children’s Hospitalin Boston, Massachusetts. Dr Goldstein is a member of the
American Academy of Pediatrics, the American Society of
Nephrology, the International Pediatric Nephrology Asso-ciation, the American Society of Pediatric Nephrology, theInternational Society of Nephrology, and the Society forPediatric Research. In addition, he is Chairman of the MedicalAdvisory Committee to the FORUM of ESRD Networks and amember of the Medical Review Board for the ESRD Networks9 and 10, is the Pediatric Nephrologist Representative for the
International Society of Nephrology Commission of Acute
Renal Failure, and has been elected to the Council of theAmerican Society of Pediatric Nephrology. Dr Goldstein hasdeveloped and validated the pediatric modiﬁed RIFLE(pRIFLE) AKI criteria, is Founder and Principal Investigatorfor the Prospective Pediatric Continuous Renal ReplacementTherapy (ppCRRT) Registry Group, and has evaluated novelurinary AKI biomarkers in the pediatric critical care setting. He
has written over 110 journal articles and contributed book
chapters to numerous texts including, Critical Care Nephrology ,
Evidence-Based Nephrology ,Handbook of Dialysis Therapy ,
Management of Acute Kidney Problems ,Pediatric Critical Care ,
Pediatric Nephrology ,a n d Pediatric Nephrology in the ICU .
Advisor/Consultant: Baxter; GambroSpeaker: GambroGrant/Research Support: Amgen; Baxter; GambroCharles A Herzog, MD , is Director of the Cardiovascular
Special Studies Center, United States Renal Data System(USRDS). An investigator at the USRDS since 1999,Dr Herzog has been a cardiologist at Hennepin CountyMedical Center (HCMC) in Minneapolis and a member of theUniversity of Minnesota faculty for 27 years. He has beena professor of medicine at the University of Minnesota since2004 and the cardiology consultant to the ESRD program
(dialysis and renal transplant) at HCMC since 1985. He
founded the program in interventional cardiology and servedas the director of the cardiac catheterization laboratory atHCMC from 1985 to 1991. Since 1997, Dr Herzog has beenthe director of the cardiac ultrasound laboratory at HCMC.He participated in the development of the National KidneyFoundation’s K/DOQI Clinical Practice Guidelines for Cardio-vascular Disease in Dialysis Patients, and co-chaired the 2010
KDIGO Controversies Conference, ‘‘Cardiovascular Disease in
CKD: What is it and What Can We Do About It?’’ The authoror co-author of more than 100 published papers and reviews,Dr Herzog has served on the Editorial Board for the American
Heart Journal since 2005 and as liaison editor (cardiology) for
Nephrology Dialysis Transplantation since 2007. His areas of
research and special interests include cardiac disease andchronic kidney disease, and echocardiography.
Advisor/Consultant: Abbott; Affymax; Amgen; CorMedix;FibroGen; FreseniusBoard of Trustees: Roche Foundation for Anemia ResearchHonorarium: UpToDateGrant/Research Support: Johnson &Johnson; National Institutes
of HealthEquity Interest: Boston Scientiﬁc; Cambridge Heart; Johnson&Johnson; Merck
Michael Joannidis, MD , is Associate Professor in Medicine
and serves as Director of the Medical Intensive Care Unit,Dept. Internal Medicine I at Medical University Innsbruck inAustria. He is a certiﬁed specialist in critical-care medicine,nephrology, and cardiology, and his research interests coverseveral aspects of critical-care medicine with a major focus onAKI, renal tubular epithelial pathophysiology, RRT, and sepsis.
Dr Joannidis currently serves as chair of the section Acute
Kidney Injury of the European Society of Intensive CareMedicine (ESICM), President of the Austrian Society ofMedical and General Intensive Care Medicine (OEGIAIM)and associate editor of Intensive Care Medicine .
Speaker: Baxter; Fresenius; Gambro
Andreas Kribben, MD , is Professor of Medicine and Head of
the Department of Nephrology at the University HospitalEssen at the University of Duisburg-Essen. He received hismedical degree at the Johann-Wolfgang Goethe UniversityFrankfurt, Germany in 1983. Dr Kribben was trained inInternal Medicine and Nephrology at the Department ofNephrology of the University Hospital Klinikum Steglitz,Free University of Berlin, Germany and at the UniversityHospital Essen, University Duisburg-Essen, Germany. From
Kidney International Supplements (2012) 2, 116–121 117biographic and disclosure information
1990 to 1993, he was a research fellow at the Renal Division
of the University of Colorado Health Sciences Centre inDenver, Colorado, USA. His major scientiﬁc interests includeall aspects of AKI, CRF, as well as transplantation andhypertension.
Dr Kribben is member of numerous professional organi-
zations, including the International Society of Nephrology,the American Society of Nephrology, the European Dialysis
and Transplantation Association, and he is a member of the
Board of Directors of the German Society of Nephrology.He is an editorial member of Clinical Nephrology and served
as subject editor of Nephrology Dialysis Transplantation .
Dr Kribben is also a member of the World HealthOrganization Work Group for the 11th revision of ICD.
Advisor/Consultant: Roche; Shire; TevaSpeaker: Amgen; Apherese ForschungsInstitut; Baxter;
Bayer-Schering; Berlin-Chemie; Fresenius; GE Healthcare;
Genzyme; Roche; ShireGrant/Research Support: B. Braun; Biosite; Fresenius;Koehler; Roche; Teva
Andrew S Levey, MD , is Dr Gerald J. and Dorothy R.
Friedman Professor of Medicine at Tufts University Schoolof Medicine, Chief of the William B. Schwartz, MD Division
of Nephrology at Tufts Medical Center, Senior Scientist at
the US Department of Agriculture Human NutritionResearch Center on Aging at Tufts University, and Professor,Clinical Research at the Sackler School of GraduateBiomedical Sciences at Tufts University. His research ismainly in the areas of epidemiology of CKD and cardio-vascular disease in CKD, controlled trials to slow theprogression of CKD, clinical assessment of kidney function,
assessment and improvement of outcomes in dialysis and
transplantation, and clinical practice guideline develop-ment and implementation. Dr Levey is currently ProgramDirector for an NIDDK-funded clinical research trainingprogram, ‘‘Clinical Trials, Epidemiology and OutcomesResearch in Nephrology’’ . He is also the Director of theTufts Center for Guideline Development and Implementationand Editor of the American Journal of Kidney Disease .
Dr Levey is past Chair of the NKF’s Task Force onCardiovascular Disease in Chronic Renal Disease, KDOQIWork Group on Chronic Kidney Disease: Evaluation,Classiﬁcation and Stratiﬁcation, and KDOQI Work Groupon Hypertension and Antihypertensive Agents in ChronicKidney Disease.
Grant/Research Support: Amgen; National Institutes ofHealth; National Kidney Foundation
Alison M MacLeod, MBChB, MD, FRCP London andEdinburgh, is Professor in the Department of Medicineand Therapeutics at the University of Aberdeen MedicalSchool, UK. She completed her fellowship at the RoyalColleges of Physicians of London and Edinburgh, and hasinterests in epidemiology of CKD, AKI, and evidence basedmedicine in nephrology. Her research group also conductssystematic literature reviews and she is a member of theEditorial Board of the Cochrane Review Group. Dr MacLeodis a current committee member of the European RenalRegistry Executive Committee, Anemia Management inChronic Kidney Disease– National Institute for Health andClinical Excellence, Scientiﬁc Committee, and EuropeanRenal Association Congress. In addition, she is Chairmanof the Scottish Intercollegiate Guidelines Network, Diagnosis
and Management of Chronic Renal Failure and was a
member of the Executive Committee of KDIGO.
Dr MacLeod reported no relevant ﬁnancial relationships.
Ravindra L Mehta, MD, FACP, FASN, FRCP , is Professor
of Medicine in the Division of Nephrology and AssociateChair for Clinical Research in the Department of Medicineat the University of California, San Diego (UCSD) where
he directs the Acute Dialysis Program and the UCSD
CREST and Masters in Clinical Research Program. Hereceived the M.B.B.S. degree (1976) from the GovernmentMedical School in Amritsar, India, and the M.D. (1979)and D.M. (1981) degrees from the Post-Graduate Instituteof Medical Education and Research in Chandigarh, India.He subsequently completed a nephrology fellowship atthe University of Rochester in Rochester, New Y ork and
obtained his boards in internal medicine (1986) and
Nephrology (1988). He has been on the faculty at UCSDsince 1988.
Dr Mehta is an internationally recognized expert in the
ﬁeld of ARF and has directed several clinical studies in themanagement of patients with kidney disease includingcomparing different dialytic modalities in the treatment ofAKI, conducting large multicenter observational studies of
AKI with the PICARD group, evaluating different predictive
models for outcomes in AKI, investigating the role ofcytokine removal by dialysis membranes in sepsis and AKI,and evaluating techniques for determining the amount ofexcess ﬂuid in dialysis patients. In addition to his clinical andresearch activities, he has worked with the American Societyof Nephrology, NKF, Society of Critical Care Medicine, andthe International Society of Nephrology in developing
courses for fellows and practicing physicians in clinical
nephrology and dialysis techniques. Dr Mehta chairs theannual International Conference on CRRT that is now in its15th year and he is also the Chair of the International Societyof Nephrology Committee on AKI, founding member of theADQI and AKIN. He has authored over 150 scientiﬁc articles,papers and book chapters, and has been actively involved inresident and scholar teaching. He won the house staff
teaching award on four occasions and was awarded School of
Medicine Faculty teaching award in 2003. He has beenrecognized as one of the Best Doctors in San Diego and theUSA. In 2008, he was recognized by the AmericanNephrologists of Indian Origin for his achievements innephrology. In March 2009, he was elected as a Fellow of theRoyal College of Physicians in the UK. Over the course of hisacademic career, he has trained over 50 postdoctoral fellows
118 Kidney International Supplements (2012) 2, 116–121biographic and disclosure information
in nephrology, of whom 15 have carried out their research
projects with him.
Advisor/Consultant: Astute Medical; Eli Lilly; TakedaSpeaker: Baxter; GambroGrant/Research Support: Eli Lilly
Patrick T Murray, MD, FASN, FRCPI, FJFICMI,i sanephrologist and clinical pharmacologist at the Mater
Misericordiae University Hospital and University College
Dublin, Ireland. Dr Murray received his medical education atUniversity College Dublin, Ireland and following his intern-ship at the Mater Misericordiae University Hospital inDublin, he completed his residency in internal medicineat Hennepin County Medical Cent er in Minneapolis, Minnesota,
USA and fellowship training programs in nephrology, criticalcare medicine, and clinical pharmacology at the University of
Chicago Hospitals in Chicago, Illinois, USA.
Dr Murray is board-certiﬁed in internal medicine,
nephrology, critical care medicine, and clinical pharmacology
and practiced as an intensivist, nephrologist, and clinicalpharmacologist at the University of Chicago Hospitals from1996 to 2008, serving as the fellowship training programdirector in nephrology and also directing the Acute DialysisService. Since 2008, he has been the Professor of Clinical
Pharmacology at University College Dublin, and a Con-
sultant in Nephrology & Clinical Pharmacology at the MaterMisericordiae University Hospital. Dr Murray has publishedextensively with contributions in numerous books inclu-ding, Critical Care Nephrology ,Evidence-Based Nephrology ,
Evidence-Based Practice of Critical Care , and Intensive Care in
Nephrology . He has a long-standing interest in research and
education to improve the prevention, diagnosis, and therapy
of AKI.
Advisor/Consultant: Abbott; Alere; AM Pharma; Argutus
Medical; FAST Diagnostics; Reata; Sanoﬁ-AventisGrant/Research Support: Abbott; Alere; Argutus Medical
Saraladevi Naicker, MBChB, MRCP, FRCP, FCP (SA), PhD ,
is currently Academic Head of the Department ofInternal Medicine and Professor of Renal Medicine and head
of the Division of Nephrology at the University of the
Witwatersrand in Johannesburg. She completed her under-graduate and postgraduate medical training primarily at theUniversity of Natal in Durban, South Africa and spent shortperiods training in nephrology at the Universities of theWitwatersrand, Johannesburg and Newcastle on Tyne in theUK. She currently chairs the Postgraduate (Higher Degrees)Committee of the Faculty of Health Sciences at the University
of the Witwatersrand and is a member of the Council of the
College of Physicians of the Colleges of Medicine of SouthAfrica. She is also a Council member of the InternationalSociety of Nephrology (ISN) and chairs its EducationCommittee.
Dr Naicker was the recipient of the Philip T obias/Convo-
cation Distinguished T eachers Award at the University of theWitwatersrand in 2006, the International DistinguishedMedal of NKF of the USA in 2005 and was awarded theprestigious Roscoe Robinson award for nephrology educationby the ISN at its World Congress in Milan in May 2009. Shehas hosted the nephrology training of ISN Fellows fromEthiopia, Nigeria, Botswana, Tanzania, Rwanda, Kenya andZambia as well as ISPD trainees from Nigeria and Tanzania.During her period as Chair of the Africa Committee of ISNCOMGAN from 2000 to 2007, she made site visits and
participated in continuing medical education programs in
many African countries. Her research interests include areasrelated to HIV and kidney disease, prevention of CKD, CVDin renal disease, and medical education.
Advisor/Consultant: Amgen; Novartis; Roche
Steven M Opal, MD , is Professor of Medicine at The Warren
Alpert Medical School of Brown University and Chief of the
Infectious Disease Division, Memorial Hospital of Rhode
Island. He received his medical degree from Albany MedicalSchool, Albany, New Y ork and completed his fellowshiptraining in infectious diseases at Walter Reed Army MedicalCenter in Washington, DC. Dr Opal is a member ofnumerous national and international committees including,International Steering Committee for Sepsis Clinical Trials;Steering Committee FDA Meta-analysis Committee on
Sepsis; International Endotoxin Society; and International
Sepsis Forum. He has written extensively with over 300publications and has given more than 100 invited presenta-tions. Dr Opal currently serves on the editorial boards ofAdvances in Sepsis ,Critical Care Forum ,Current Opinion in
Critical Care , and Shock . In recognition for his work, he was
awarded the Brown Medical School Infectious DiseaseFellowship T eacher of the Year Award in 2008 and was
acknowledged in Best Doctors in America from 2003 to 2009.
Dr Opal reported no relevant ﬁnancial relationships.
Franz Schaefer, MD , is Professor of Pediatrics and Chief of
the Pediatric Nephrology Division at Heidelberg University
Hospital. Dr Schaefer received his M.D. at Wu ¨rzburg
University Medical School and performed research scholar-ships at the Institute of Child Health, London, University of
Virginia, and Stanford University. His research interests
include topics on physiopathology of growth failure,cardiovascular and endocrine disorders in CKD and the roleof genetic abnormalities in congenital kidney disorders. Inclinical research, he conducted numerous collaborativeclinical trials and established several international consortiasuch as the the European Study Group on Progressive CKDin Children, the International Pediatric Peritoneal Dialysis
Network, and the PodoNet Registry for Steroid Resistant
Nephrotic Syndrome. Dr Schaefer has published over 280articles and book chapters, and co-edited the standardtextbooks Comprehensive Pediatric Nephrology and Pediatric
Dialysis . He received several prestigious awards for innovative
research including the Recklinghausen Prize and the IBMFaculty Award. Dr Schaefer is a current council member ofthe International Pediatric Nephrology Association and the
Kidney International Supplements (2012) 2, 116–121 119biographic and disclosure information
International Society of Peritoneal Dialysis. He is a member
of several editorial boards and serves as Section Editor forNephrology Dialysis Transplantation andPediatric Nephrology .
Dr Schaefer reported no relevant ﬁnancial relationships.
Miet Schetz, MD, PhD , graduated from the faculty
of Medicine of the Catholic University of Leuven, Belgium,after which she specialized in anesthesiology and later in
intensive care medicine. Since 1981 she is staff member of
the department of Intensive Care Medicine at the UniversityHospital Leuven (Chair: Greet Van den Berghe) and hasbeen Associate Professor at the Catholic University Leuvensince 2000. Dr Schetz completed her PhD thesis on thesubject, ‘‘The Hemostatic System and Continuous RenalReplacement Therapy: Mutual Effects’’ . Her main ﬁeld ofinterest is AKI and its treatment, on which she published
several articles.
Grant/Research Support: Gambro
Shigehiko Uchino, MD, PhD , is Associate Professor and Staff
Intensivist in the Department of Anesthesiology at Jikei
University School of Medicine in T okyo, Japan. He receivedhis medical degree from T okyo Medical and DentalUniversity and his PhD from Jikei University School of
Medicine. Dr Uchino is a member of the Japanese Society of
Intensive Care Medicine, Japanese Association for AcuteMedicine, Society of Critical Care Medicine, and theEuropean Society of Intensive Care Medicine. In additionto serving as a reviewer for numerous journals, he has writtenbook chapters in recent texts such as Critical Care Nephrology ,
Evidence-Based Practice of Critical Care , and Intensive Care
in Nephrology . Dr Uchino is also a coinvestigator in the
BEST Kidney study.
Dr Uchino reported no relevant ﬁnancial relationships.
KDIGO CHAIRS
Kai-Uwe Eckardt, MD , is Professor of Medicine and Chief
of Nephrology and Hypertension at the University ofErlangen—Nuremberg, Germany. He received his MD fromthe Westfa ¨lische Wilhelms-Universita ¨tM u¨nster, Germany. In
1993, following postgraduate training in internal medicine,pathology and physiology, he was appointed AssistantProfessor of Physiology at the University of Regensburg,
Germany. Subsequently, he continued his training in internal
medicine and nephrology at the Charite ´, Humboldt Uni-
versity in Berlin, where he was appointed Associate Professorof Nephrology in 2000. His major scientiﬁc interests are inthe molecular mechanisms and physiological/pathophysio-logical relevance of oxygen sensing and the management ofanemia. As such, he has contributed to the development ofthe European Best Practice Guidelines for Anemia Manage-
ment and participated in the CREATE and TREAT studies.
Professor Eckardt is subject editor of Nephrology Dialysis
Transplantation and serves on the editorial board of several
other journals. He has also authored book chapters and mostrecently served as a Co-Editor of the text, Studies on RenalDisorders . Dr Eckardt is a member of the executive committee
of KDIGO.
Advisor/Consultant: Affymax; Amgen; Hexal Sandoz;Johnson &Johnson; Roche
Speaker: Amgen; Janssen Cilag; Johnson &Johnson; Roche
Grant/Research Support: Roche
Bertram L Kasiske, MD , is Professor of Medicine at the
University of Minnesota, USA. He received his medicaldegree from the University of Iowa and completed hisInternal Medicine residency and fellowship training inNephrology at Hennepin County Medical Center where heis currently Director of Nephrology.
Dr Kasiske is former Deputy Director of the United States
Renal Data System and former Editor-in-Chief of The
American Journal of Kidney Diseases . He has served as
Secretary/Treasurer and on the Board of Directors of theAmerican Society of Transplantation, and on the OrganProcurement and Transplantation Network/United Networkof Organ Sharing Board of Directors, and the ScientiﬁcAdvisory Board of the National Kidney Foundation. He iscurrently serving on the Board of Councilors of theInternational Society of Nephrology. He is the PrincipalInvestigator for a National Institutes of Health-sponsored,
multi-center study of long term outcomes after kidney
donation. He is the Director of the Scientiﬁc Registry ofTransplant Recipients. He has over 160 scientiﬁc publicationsin major peer reviewed journals, and 230 review articles,editorials and textbook chapters. Dr Kasiske is also a recipientof the NKF’s Garabed Eknoyan Award in 2003.
Advisor/Consultant: LitholinkGrant/Research Support: Bristol-Myers Squibb; Merck-Schering
Plough
EVIDENCE REVIEW TEAM
Katrin Uhlig, MD, MS , is the Director, Guideline Develop-
ment at the Tufts Center for Kidney Disease Guideline
Development and Implementation, Boston, MA, AssociateProfessor of Medicine at Tufts University School of Medicine,and a staff nephrologist at Tufts Medical Center. Dr Uhligcompleted her training in internal medicine, nephrology, andrheumatology in Germany (Aachen University Hospital andMunich University Hospital) and the USA (Georgetown
University Medical Center and Tufts Medical Center). Since
2001, she has been participating in or directing the evidencereview for KDOQI and KDIGO guidelines. In 2005, sheco-chaired the KDIGO Evidence Rating Group to developa consensus on grading of KDIGO guidelines. From 2006to 2007, she served as Co-Editor of the American Journal
of Kidney Diseases . Her focus in teaching and research is in
evidence-based medicine, systematic review, clinical practice
guideline development, and critical literature appraisal.
Dr Uhlig reported no relevant ﬁnancial relationships.
Jose Calvo-Broce, MD, MS , served as a research fellow at the
Tufts Center for Kidney Disease Guideline Development and
120 Kidney International Supplements (2012) 2, 116–121biographic and disclosure information
Implementation in Boston, MA and participated in the
conduct of systematic reviews and critical literature apprai-sals for this guideline. Dr Calvo-Broce was recently awardeda Master of Science in Clinical Research for his thesison ‘‘Hospital-Acquired AKI: An Analysis of Nadir-to-PeakSerum Creatinine Increments Stratiﬁed by Baseline EstimatedGFR’’ .
Dr Calvo-Broce reported no relevant ﬁnancial relationships.
Aneet Deo, MD, MS , served as a research fellow at the
Tufts Center for Kidney Disease Guideline Developmentand Implementation in Boston, MA. She participated in theconduct of systematic reviews and critical literature appraisalsfor this guideline. Dr Deo was awarded a Master of Sciencein Clinical Research for her thesis on ‘‘Loss to Analysis inRandomized Controlled Trials of Chronic Kidney Disease’’ .
Dr Deo reported no relevant ﬁnancial relationships.
Amy Earley, BS , is a project coordinator at the Tufts Center
for Kidney Disease Guideline Development and Implementa-
tion in Boston, MA. She assists in the development of clinical
practice guidelines and conducts systematic reviews andcritical literature appraisals.
Ms Earley reported no relevant ﬁnancial relationships.
Kidney International Supplements (2012) 2, 116–121 121biographic and disclosure information
Acknowledgments
Kidney International Supplements (2012) 2,122– 123; doi:10.1038/kisup.2011.37
A special debt of gratitude is owed to the current KDIGO
Co-Chairs Kai-Uwe Eckardt and Bertram Kasiske and the
KDIGO Board for their invaluable guidance throughoutthe development of this guideline. In particular, we thank theERT members: Katrin Uhlig, Jose Calvo-Broce, Aneet Deo,and Amy Earley, for their substantial contribution to therigorous assessment of the available evidence. We are alsoespecially grateful to the Work Group members for theirexpertise throughout the entire process of literature review,
data extraction, meeting participation, the critical writing
and editing of the statements and rationale, which made thepublication of this guideline possible. The generous gift oftheir time and dedication is greatly appreciated. Finally, andon behalf of the Work Group, we gratefully acknowledgethe careful assessment of the draft guideline by externalreviewers. The Work Group considered all of the valuablecomments made and where appropriate, suggested changes
were incorporated into the ﬁnal publication. The following
individuals and organizations provided review of the draftguideline:
Omar Abboud, Mona Al–Rukhaimi (Dubai Hospital),
Mustafa Arici (Hacettepe University Faculty of Medicine),Mariano Arriola (Clinica de Nefrologia, Urologia yEnfermedades Cardiovasculares, Argentina), Adanze Asinobi(University of Ibadan, Nigeria), Alper Azak (Ankara Educa-
tion and Research Hospital), Gavin Becker (Royal Melbourne
Hospital), Rudy Bilous (The James Cook University Hospi-tal), Yousef Boobes (Tawam Hospital, UAE), CatherineBouman (Dutch Society of Intensive Care Medicine), CarloBriguori (Clinica Mediterranea), Eric S Cantor (GE Health-care), Maria Ines Carvallo, William R Clark (Gambro),Adrian Covic (Hospital CI Parhon, Romania), Daniel Coyne(Washington University School of Medicine), Joe Dasta
(Society of Critical Care Medicine), Jane S Davis (University
of Alabama at Birmingham), Angel de Francisco (SpanishSociety of Nephrology), Jean-Yves De Vos (AZ WerkenGlorieux Dialysis Unit), Pierre Delanaye (University ofLie`ge), Sarah Faubel (American Society of Nephrology),
Ana Elizabeth Figueiredo (Hospital Sa ˜o Lucas), Thorsten
Feldkamp (Universita ¨tsklinikum Essen, Universita ¨t
Duisburg-Essen), Kevin Finkel (Society of Critical Care
Medicine), Lui G Forni (European Society of Intensive Care
Medicine), Heidi Frankel (Society of Critical Care Medicine),Gerard Fulda (Society of Critical Care Medicine),Mohammed Benghanem Gharbi (University Hospital IbnRochd), Richard J Glassock (UCLA), Robert S Gold (DCBA),Basu Gopal (Christian Medical College), Jeff Harder(University of Washington Medical Center), BrendaHemmelgarn (Canadian Society of Nephrology), Hallvard
Holdaas (National Hospital - Norway), Lai Seong Hooi
(Hospital Sultanah Aminah), Atsuko Ikemori (St. MariannaUniversity School of Medicine), Enyu Imai (Nagoya Uni-versity School of Medicine), Lesley Inker (Tufts-New EnglandMedical Center), Sarwar Iqbal (BIRDEM Hospital), Kuni-toshi Iseki (Ryukyn University), Simon Jenkins, SvendLorentz Jorgensen (Pharmacosmos A/S), Takei Kake (ChugaiPharmaceutical), Nada Kanaan (Cliniques Universitaires
Saint Luc), Markus Ketteler (Klinikum Coburg GGmbH),
Mahmoud El-Khatib (University of Cincinnati), PradeepKumar Rai (Opal Hospital, Varanasi, India), Hanife Kurtal(Charite ´-Universita ¨tsmedizin, Berlin), Craig B Langman
(Children’s Memorial Hospital, Chicago), Ingrid Ledebo(Gambro AB), Edgar Lerma (University of Illinois at ChicagoCollege of Medicine), Nathan W Levin (Renal ResearchInstitute), Andrew Lewington (The Renal Association, UK),
Visnja Lezaic (Clinical Centre of Serbia), Zhi-Hong Liu
(Nanjing University School of Medicine), Raul Lombardi(Latin American Society of Nephrology & Hypertension),Ge´rard London (ERA/EDTA), Jose ´Anto´nio Lopes (Hospital
de Santa Maria), Robert Mactier (The Renal Association,UK), Constantine Manthous (American Thoracic Society),Omar Maoujoud (Mohammed V Military Hospital), Pablo UMassari, John McIlwaine (American College of Chest
Physicians), Cecilia Mengarelli (Fresenuis Mansilla), Gong
Mengchun (Peking Union Medical College Hospital), WalidMohamed (Alexandria University Hospital), Raﬁque Moosa(University of Stellenbosch), Jose M Morales (Hospital 12 deOctubre, Spain; European Society for Organ Transplanta-tion), Sameh K Morcos (Northern General Hospital),Toshiki Moriyama (Osaka University Health Care Center),Abdou Niang (Cheikh Anta Diop University), Eisei Noiri
(Japanese Society of Nephrology), Fernando Nolasco
(Portuguese Society of Nephrology), Maurizio Nordio(Dirigente Medico), Michał Nowicki (Medical University ofLodz), Ercan Ok (Turkish Society of Nephrology), SuzanneOparil (University of Alabama at Birmingham), HeleenOudemans (Danish Society of Intensive Care), ErlingPedersen (Holstebro Hospital and University of Aarhus),Momir Polenakovic (Balkan Cities Association of Nephro-
logy, Dialysis, Transplantation and Artiﬁcial Organs), Manuel
Praga (Hospital 12 de Octubre, Spain), Wajeh Qunibi(University of Texas Health Science Center), Enrique Andre ´s
Ribes (Fundacio ´Puigvert), Eduardo Rocha (Rio de Janeiro
Federal University Medical School), Cibele Rodrigues(Catholic University of Sa ˜o Paulo), Guillermo Rosa-Diez
(Hospital Italiano de Buenos Aires - Argentina), Brad Rovinacknowledgments http://www.kidney-international.org
&2012 KDIGO
122 Kidney International Supplements (2012) 2, 122–123
(Ohio State University), Nestor Schor (Universidade Federal
de Sao Paulo-UNIFESP), Mehmet Sukru Sever (EuropeanRenal Best Practice), Amma Sewaah-Bonsu (NephrologyAssociates of Central Florida), Deepak Sharma (Mil HospitalJalandhar, India), Justin Silver (Hadassah University Hospi-tal), Richard Solomon (Fletcher Allen Health Care), PeterSpiro (American College of Chest Physicians), TakeshiSugaya (St. Marianna University School of Medicine), Cem
Sungur (Anadolu Medical Center), Charles Swanepoel
(University of Cape Town), Seng Hoe Tan (GleneaglesMedical Centre, Singapore), Samuel A Tisherman (Societyof Critical Care Medicine), Charles Tomson (SouthmeadHospital), Ste ´phan Troyanov (Ho ˆpital du Sacre ´-Coeur,
Montreal), Hung-Bin Tsai (Buddhist Dalin Tzu Chi GeneralHospital), Hirokazu Tsukahara (Okayama UniversityHospital), Wim Van Biesen (University Hospital Ghent),Raymond Vanholder (University Hospital Ghent), RowanWalker (Royal Melbourne Hospital), Michael Walsh(McMaster University), HaiYan Wang (Beijing University),Jiandong Wei (SUNY Downstate Medical Center), ColinWhite (University of British Columbia), Hitoshi Yokoyama(Kanazawa Medical University), Luis Yu (University ofSa˜o Paulo), Elena Zakharova (Moscow City Hospital),
Carmine Zoccali (CNR-IBIM Clin Research Unit Ospedali
Riuniti, Italy), Kim Zuber (Metropolitan Nephrology
Associates).
Participation in the review does not necessarily constitute
endorsement of the content of this report by above indivi-duals or the organization or institution they represent.
John A Kellum, MD, FCCM, FACP, Work Group Co-Chair
Norbert Lameire, MD, PhD, Work Group Co-Chair
Kidney International Supplements (2012) 2, 122–123 123acknowledgments
References
Kidney International Supplements (2012) 2,124– 138; doi:10.1038/kisup.2011.38
1. Chertow GM, Burdick E, Honour M, et al. Acute kidney injury, mortality,
length of stay, and costs in hospitalized patients. J Am Soc Nephrol 2005; 16:
3365– 3370.
2. Hoste EA, Clermont G, Kersten A, et al. RIFLE criteria for acute kidney
injury are associated with hospital mortality in critically ill patients: a
cohort analysis. Crit Care 2006; 10:R73.
3. Lassnigg A, Schmidlin D, Mouhieddine M, et al. Minimal changes of serum
creatinine predict prognosis in patients after cardiothoracic surgery: aprospective cohort study. J Am Soc Nephrol 2004; 15:1597– 1605.
4. Levy EM, Viscoli CM, Horwitz RI. The effect of acute renal failure on
mortality. A cohort analysis. JAMA 1996; 275: 1489– 1494.
5. Uchino S, Bellomo R, Goldsmith D, et al. An assessment of the RIFLE
criteria for acute renal failure in hospitalized patients. Crit Care Med 2006;
34:1913– 1917.
6. Hoste EA, Kellum JA. Acute renal failure in the critically ill: impact on
morbidity and mortality. Contrib Nephrol 2004; 144: 1– 11.
7. Uchino S, Kellum JA, Bellomo R, et al. Acute renal failure in critically ill
patients: a multinational, multicenter study. JAMA 2005; 294: 813– 818.
8. Bagshaw SM, Langenberg C, Bellomo R. Urinary biochemistry and
microscopy in septic acute renal failure: a systematic review. Am J Kidney
Dis2006; 48:695– 705.
9. Bagshaw SM, Langenberg C, Wan L, et al. A systematic review of urinary
ﬁndings in experimental septic acute renal failure. Crit Care Med 2007; 35:
1592– 1598.
10. Shanley PF, Rosen MD, Brezis M, et al. Topography of focal proximal
tubular necrosis after ischemia with reﬂow in the rat kidney. Am J Pathol
1986; 122: 462– 468.
11. Heyman SN, Brezis M, Epstein FH, et al. Effect of glycine and hypertrophy
on renal outer medullary hypoxic injury in ischemia reﬂow and contrastnephropathy. Am J Kidney Dis 1992; 19:578– 586.
12. Rosen S, Heyman SN. Difﬁculties in understanding human ‘‘acute tubular
necrosis’’: limited data and ﬂawed animal models. Kidney Int 2001; 60:
1220– 1224.
13. Brun C, Munck O. Lesions of the kidney in acute renal failure following
shock. Lancet 1957; 272: 603– 607.
14. Klenzak J, Himmelfarb J. Sepsis and the kidney. Crit Care Clin 2005; 21:
211– 222.
15.
Lameire N. The pathophysiology of acute renal failure. Crit Care Clin 2005;
21:197– 210.
16. Eknoyan G. Emergence of the concept of acute renal failure. Am J Nephrol
2002; 22:225– 230.
17. Davies F, Weldon R. A contribution to the study of ‘‘war nephritis’’ . Lancet
1917; ii:118– 120.
18. Bywaters EGL, Beall D. Crush injuries with impairment of renal function.
BMJ 1947; 1:427– 432.
19. Kellum JA, Levin N, Bouman C, et al. Developing a consensus classiﬁcation
system for acute renal failure. Curr Opin Crit Care 2002; 8:509– 514.
20. Brivet FG, Kleinknecht DJ, Loirat P , et al. Acute renal failure in intensive
care units–causes, outcome, and prognostic factors of hospital mortality; a
prospective, multicenter study. French Study Group on Acute Renal Failure.
Crit Care Med 1996; 24:192– 198.
21. Liano F, Pascual J. Epidemiology of acute renal failure: a prospective,
multicenter, community-based study. Madrid Acute Renal Failure Study
Group. Kidney Int 1996; 50:811– 818.
22. Bellomo R, Ronco C, Kellum JA, et al. Acute renal failure - deﬁnition,
outcome measures, animal models, ﬂuid therapy and information
technology needs: the Second International Consensus Conference of theAcute Dialysis Quality Initiative (ADQI) Group. Crit Care 2004; 8:
R204– 212.
23. Mehta RL, Kellum JA, Shah SV, et al. Acute Kidney Injury Network: report
of an initiative to improve outcomes in acute kidney injury. Crit Care 2007;
11:R31.
24. Levy MM, Macias WL, Vincent JL, et al. Early changes in organ function
predict eventual survival in severe sepsis. Crit Care Med 2005; 33:2194– 2201.
25. Bagshaw SM, George C, Dinu I, et al. A multi-centre evaluation of the
RIFLE criteria for early acute kidney injury in critically ill patients. Nephrol
Dial Transplant 2008; 23:1203– 1210.26. Kellum JA, Bellomo R, Ronco C. Classiﬁcation of acute kidney injury using
RIFLE: What’s the purpose? Crit Care Med 2007; 35:1983– 1984.
27. Ricci Z, Cruz D, Ronco C. The RIFLE criteria and mortality in acute kidney
injury: A systematic review. Kidney Int 2008; 73:538– 546.
28. Thakar CV , Christianson A, Freyberg R, et al. Incidence and outcomes of
acute kidney injury in intensive care units: a Veterans Administration study.Crit Care Med 2009; 37:2552– 2558.
29. Joannidis M, Metnitz B, Bauer P , et al. Acute kidney injury in critically ill
patients classiﬁed by AKIN versus RIFLE using the SAPS 3 database.
Intensive Care Med 2009; 35:1692–
 1702.
30. Ostermann M, Chang RW. Acute kidney injury in the intensive care unit
according to RIFLE. Crit Care Med 2007; 35:1837– 1843.
31. Ali T, Khan I, Simpson W, et al. Incidence and outcomes in acute kidney
injury: a comprehensive population-based study. J Am Soc Nephrol 2007;
18:1292– 1298.
32. Akcan-Arikan A, Zappitelli M, Loftis LL, et al. Modiﬁed RIFLE criteria in
critically ill children with acute kidney injury. Kidney Int 2007; 71:
1028– 1035.
33. Hackworth LA, Wen X, Clermont G, et al. Hospital versus community-
acquired acute kidney injury in the critically ill: differences in epidemiology(abstr). J Am Soc Nephrol 2009; 20:115A.
34. Cerda J, Bagga A, Kher V, et al. The contrasting characteristics of acute
kidney injury in developed and developing countries. Nat Clin Pract
Nephrol 2008; 4:138– 153.
35. Cerda J, Lameire N, Eggers P , et al. Epidemiology of acute kidney injury.
Clin J Am Soc Nephrol 2008; 3:881– 886.
36. Institute of Medicine. Crossing the Quality Chasm: a New Health System forthe 21st Century . National Academy Press: Washington, DC, 2001.
37. Eknoyan G. Are global nephrology guidelines feasible? Nat Clin Pract
Nephrol 2008; 4:521.
38. Eknoyan G, Lameire N, Barsoum R, et al. The burden of kidney disease:
improving global outcomes. Kidney Int 2004; 66:1310– 1314.
39. Levin A, Stevens LA. Executing change in the management of chronic
kidney disease: perspectives on guidelines and practice. Med Clin North Am
2005; 89:701– 709.
40. Atkins D, Best D, Briss PA, et al. Grading quality of evidence and strength of
recommendations. BMJ 2004; 328: 1490.
41. Uhlig K, Macleod A, Craig J, et al. Grading evidence and recommendations
for clinical practice guidelines in nephrology. A position statement fromKidney Disease: Improving Global Outcomes (KDIGO). Kidney Int 2006;
70:2058– 2065.
42. National Kidney Foundation. K/DOQI clinical practice guidelines for
chronic kidney disease: evaluation, classiﬁcation, and stratiﬁcation. Am J
Kidney Dis 2002; 39 (2 Suppl 1): S1– 266.
43. Levey AS, Eckardt KU, Tsukamoto Y, et al. Deﬁnition and classiﬁcation of
chronic kidney disease: a position statement from Kidney Disease:Impro
ving Global Outcomes (KDIGO). Kidney Int 2005; 67:2089– 2100.
44. Levey AS, de Jong PE, Coresh J, et al. The deﬁnition, classiﬁcation and
prognosis of chronic kidney disease: a KDIGO Controversies Conferencereport. Kidney Int 2011; 80:17– 28.
45. Murray PT, Devarajan P , Levey AS, et al. A framework and key research
questions in AKI diagnosis and staging in different environments. Clin J Am
Soc Nephrol 2008; 3:864– 868.
46. Endre ZH. Acute kidney injury: deﬁnitions and new paradigms. Adv
Chronic Kidney Dis 2008; 15:213– 221.
47. Amdur RL, Chawla LS, Amodeo S, et al. Outcomes following diagnosis of
acute renal failure in U.S. veterans: focus on acute tubular necrosis. Kidney
Int2009; 76:1089– 1097.
48. Coca SG, Yusuf B, Shlipak MG, et al. Long-term risk of mortality and other
adverse outcomes after acute kidney injury: a systematic review and meta-
analysis. Am J Kidney Dis 2009; 53:961– 973.
49. Wald R, Quinn RR, Luo J, et al. Chronic dialysis and death among survivors
of acute kidney injury requiring dialysis. JAMA 2009; 302: 1179– 1185.
50. Harel Z, Chan CT. Predicting and preventing acute kidney injury after
cardiac surgery. Curr Opin Nephrol Hypertens 2008; 17:624– 628.
51. Reddy VG. Prevention of postoperative acute renal failure. J Postgrad Med
2002; 48:64– 70.references http://www.kidney-international.org
&2012 KDIGO
124 Kidney International Supplements (2012) 2, 124–138
52. Venkataraman R. Can we prevent acute kidney injury? Crit Care Med 2008;
36:S166– 171.
53. Stewart J, Findlay G, Smith N, et al. Adding Insult to Injury: A review of the
care of patients who died in hospital with a primary diagnosis of acute
kidney injury (acute renal failure). National Conﬁdential Enquiry into
Patient Outcome and Death: London, UK, 2009.
54. Bell M, Liljestam E, Granath F, et al. Optimal follow-up time after continuous
renal replacement therapy in actual renal failure patients stratiﬁed with the
RIFLE criteria. Nephrol Dial Transplant 2005; 20:354– 360.
55. Cruz DN, Bolgan I, Perazella MA, et al. North East Italian Prospective
Hospital Renal Outcome Survey on Acute Kidney Injury (NEiPHROS-
AKI): targeting the problem with the RIFLE Criteria. Clin J Am Soc Nephrol
2007; 2:418– 425.
56. Perez-Valdivieso JR, Bes-Rastrollo M, Monedero P , et al. Prognosis and
serum creatinine levels in acute renal failure at the time of nephrologyconsultation: an observational cohort study. BMC Nephrol 2007; 8:14.
57. Kuitunen A, Vento A, Suojaranta-Ylinen R, et al. Acute renal failure after
cardiac surgery: evaluation of the RIFLE classiﬁcation. Ann Thorac Surg
2006; 81:542– 546.
58. Coca SG, Bauling P , Schifftner T, et al. Contribution of acute kidney injury
toward morbidity and mortality in burns: a contemporary analysis.
Am J Kidney Dis 2007; 49:517– 523.
59. Arnaoutakis GJ, Bihorac A, Martin TD, et al. RIFLE criteria for acute kidney
injury in aortic arch surgery. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg 2007; 134:
1554– 1560; discussion 1560– 1551.
60. Abosaif NY, Tolba YA, Heap M, et al. The outcome of acute renal failure in
the intensive care unit according to RIFLE: model application, sensitivity,
and predictability. Am J Kidney Dis 2005; 46:1038– 1048.
61. Maccariello E, Soares M, Valente C, et al. RIFLE classiﬁcation in patients
with acute kidney injury in need of renal replacement therapy. Intensive
Care Med 2007; 33:597– 605.
62. Jenq CC, Tsai MH, Tian YC, et al. RIFLE classiﬁcation can predict short-
term prognosis in critically ill cirrhotic patients. Intensive Care Med 2007;
33:1921– 1930.
63. Tallgren M, Niemi T, Poyhia R, et al. Acute renal injury and dysfunction
following elective abdominal aortic surgery. Eur J Vasc Endovasc Surg 2007;
33:550– 555.
64. Zavada J, Hoste E, Cartin-Ceba R, et al. A comparison of three methods to
estimate baseline creatinine for RIFLE classiﬁcation. Nephrol Dial
Transplant 2010; 25:3911– 3918.
65. 
Macedo E, Bouchard J, Soroko SH, et al. Fluid accumulation, recognition
and staging of acute kidney injury in critically-ill patients. Crit Care 2010;
14:R82.
66. Doi K, Yuen PS, Eisner C, et al. Reduced production of creatinine limits its use
as marker of kidney injury in sepsis. JA mS o cN e p h r o l 2009; 20:1217– 1221.
67. Levey AS, Coresh J, Greene T, et al. Using standardized serum creatinine
values in the modiﬁcation of diet in renal disease study equation forestimating glomerular ﬁltration rate. Ann Intern Med 2006; 145: 247– 254.
68. Stevens LA, Coresh J, Feldman HI, et al. Evaluation of the modiﬁcation of
diet in renal disease study equation in a large diverse population. J Am Soc
Nephrol 2007; 18:2749– 2757.
69. Emamian SA, Nielsen MB, Pedersen JF, et al. Kidney dimensions at
sonography: correlation with age, sex, and habitus in 665 adult volunteers.AJR Am J Roentgenol 1993; 160: 83– 86.
70. Bellomo R, Wan L, May CN. Vasoactive drugs and acute renal failure.
In: Ronco C, Bellomo R, Kellum J (eds). Critical Care Nephrology , 2nd Edn.
Saunders Elsevier: Philadelphia, PA, 2009, pp 416– 419.
71. Bouchard J, Mehta RL. Fluid balance issues in the critically ill patient. In:
Ronco C, Costanzo MR, Bellomo R, Maisel A (eds). Fluid Overload:
Diagnosis and Management . S Karger AG: Basel, Switzerland, 2010,
pp 69– 78.
72. Finfer S, Jones DA. Crystalloids and colloids. In: Ronco C, Bellomo R,
Kellum J (eds). Critical Care Nephrology , 2nd Edn. Saunders Elsevier:
Philadelphia, PA, 2009, pp 571– 575.
73. Holmes CL, Walley KR. Shock. In: Murray PT, Brady HR, Hall JB (eds).
Intensive Care in Nephrology . Taylor & Francis: New Y ork, NY, 2006,
pp 1– 18.
74. Levine JS, Iglesias JI. Diuretic use and ﬂuid management. In: Murray PT,
Brady HR, Hall JB (eds). Intensive Care in Nephrology . Taylor & Francis:
New Y ork, NY, 2006, pp 315– 337.
75. McDermott G, Neligan PJ. What vasopressor agent should be used in the
septic patient? In: Deutschman CS, Neligan PJ (eds). Evidence-Based
Practice of Critical Care . Saunders: Philadelphia, PA, 2010, pp 206– 211.
76. Neligan PJ, Fanning N. What is the best way to ﬂuid-resuscitate a patient
with sepsis? In: Deutschman CS, Neligan PJ (eds). Evidence-Based Practice
of Critical Care . Saunders: Philadelphia, PA, 2010, pp 198– 205.77. Polanco PM, Pinsky MR. Hemodynamic monitoring in the intensive care
unit. In: Ronco C, Bellomo R, Kellum J (eds). Critical Care Nephrology ,
2nd Edn. Saunders Elsevier: Philadelphia, PA, 2009, pp 37– 45.
78. Prowle JR, Bellomo R. Continuous renal replacement therapy: recent
advances and future research. Nat Rev Nephrol 2010; 6:521– 529.
79. Schetz M. Assessment of volume status. In: Ronco C, Bellomo R, Kellum J
(eds). Critical Care Nephrology , 2nd Edn. Saunders Elsevier: Philadelphia,
PA, 2009, pp 499– 504.
80. Venkataraman R, Kellum JA. Principles of ﬂuid therapy. In: Ronco C,
Bellomo R, Kellum J (eds). Critical Care Nephrology , 2nd Edn. Saunders
Elsevier: Philadelphia, PA, 2009, pp 568– 571.
81. Wajanaponsan N, Pinsky MR. Monitoring and management of systemic
hemodyamics. In: Jorres A, Ronco C, Kellum JA (eds). Management of
Acute Kidney Problems ,
 1st Edn. Springer: New Y ork, NY, 2010, pp 147– 154.
82. Himmelfarb J, Joannidis M, Molitoris B, et al. Evaluation and initial
management of acute kidney injury. Clin J Am Soc Nephrol 2008; 3:
962– 967.
83. Bouchard J, Soroko SB, Chertow GM, et al. Fluid accumulation, survival
and recovery of kidney function in critically ill patients with acute kidneyinjury. Kidney Int 2009; 76:422– 427.
84. Payen D, de Pont AC, Sakr Y, et al. A positive ﬂuid balance is associated
with a worse outcome in patients with acute renal failure. Crit Care 2008;
12:R74.
85. Vincent JL. Relevance of albumin in modern critical care medicine. Best
Pract Res Clin Anaesthesiol 2009; 23:183– 191.
86. Finfer S, Bellomo R, Boyce N, et al. A comparison of albumin and saline for
ﬂuid resuscitation in the intensive care unit. N Engl J Med 2004; 350:
2247– 2256.
87. Ertmer C, Rehberg S, Van Aken H, et al. Relevance of non-albumin colloids
in intensive care medicine. Best Pract Res Clin Anaesthesiol 2009; 23:
193– 212.
88. McMahon BA, Murray PT. Urinary liver fatty acid-binding protein: another
novel biomarker of acute kidney injury. Kidney Int 2010; 77:657– 659.
89. Dickenmann M, Oettl T, Mihatsch MJ. Osmotic nephrosis: acute kidney
injury with accumulation of proximal tubular lysosomes due to adminis-tration of exogenous solutes. Am J Kidney Dis 2008; 51:491– 503.
90. de Saint-Aurin RG, Kloeckner M, Annane D. Crystalloids versus colloids for
ﬂuid resuscitation in critically-ill patients. Acta Clin Belg Suppl 2007 :
412– 416.
91. Vincent JL. Fluid resuscitation: colloids vs crystalloids. Acta Clin Belg Suppl
2007 :408– 411.
92. Schortgen F, Lacherade JC, Bruneel F, et al. Effects of hydroxyethylstarch
and gelatin on renal function in severe sepsis: a multicentre randomisedstudy. Lancet 2001; 357: 911– 916.
93. Brunkhorst FM, Engel C, Bloos F, et al. Intensive insulin therapy and
pentastarch resuscitation in severe sepsis. NE n g lJM e d 2008; 358: 125– 139.
94. Eisenbach C, Schonfeld AH, Vogt N, et al. Pharmacodynamics and organ
storage of hydroxyethyl starch in acute hemodilution in pigs: inﬂuence ofmolecular weight and degree of substitution. Intensive Care Med 2007; 33:
1637– 1644.
95. Thomas G, Balk EM, Jaber BL. Effect of intensive insulin therapy and
pentastarch resuscitation on acute kidney injury in severe sepsis. Am J
Kidney Dis 2008; 52:13–
 17.
96. Wiedermann CJ. Systematic review of randomized clinical trials on the use
of hydroxyethyl starch for ﬂuid management in sepsis. BMC Emerg Med
2008; 8:1.
97. Sakr Y , Payen D, Reinhart K, et al. Effects of hydroxyethyl starch administration
on renal function in critically ill patients. Br J Anaesth 2007; 98:216– 224.
98. Perel P , Roberts I, Pearson M. Colloids versus crystalloids for ﬂuid
resuscitation in critically ill patients. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2007; 4:
CD000567.
99. Schortgen F, Brochard L. Colloid-induced kidney injury: experimental
evidence may help to understand mechanisms. Crit Care 2009; 13:130.
100. Magder S, Potter BJ, Varennes BD, et al. Fluids after cardiac surgery: a pilot
study of the use of colloids versus crystalloids. Crit Care Med 2010; 38:
2117– 2124.
101. Wiedermann CJ, Dunzendorfer S, Gaioni LU, et al. Hyperoncotic colloids
and acute kidney injury: a meta-analysis of randomized trials. Crit Care
2010; 14:R191.
102. Prowle JR, Bellomo R. Fluid administration and the kidney. Curr Opin Crit
Care 2010; 16:332– 336.
103. Kaplan LJ, Kellum JA. Fluids, pH, ions and electrolytes. Curr Opin Crit Care
2010; 16:323– 331.
104. Karlsson S, Varpula M, Ruokonen E, et al. Incidence, treatment, and
outcome of severe sepsis in ICU-treated adults in Finland: the Finnsepsisstudy. Intensive Care Med 2007; 33:435– 443.
Kidney International Supplements (2012) 2, 124–138 125references
105. Bellomo R, Wan L, May C. Vasoactive drugs and acute kidney injury. Crit
Care Med 2008; 36:S179– 186.
106. Redl-Wenzl EM, Armbruster C, Edelmann G, et al. The effects of
norepinephrine on hemodynamics and renal function in severe septic
shock states. Intensive Care Med 1993; 19:151– 154.
107. Albanese J, Leone M, Delmas A, et al. Terlipressin or norepinephrine in
hyperdynamic septic shock: a prospective, randomized study. Crit Care Med
2005; 33:1897– 1902.
108. Lauzier F, Levy B, Lamarre P , et al. Vasopressin or norepinephrine in early
hyperdynamic septic shock: a randomized clinical trial. Intensive Care Med
2006; 32:1782– 1789.
109. De Backer D, Biston P , Devriendt J, et al. Comparison of dopamine and
norepinephrine in the treatment of shock. N Engl J Med 2010; 362: 779– 789.
110. Delmas A, Leone M, Rousseau S, et al. Clinical review: Vasopressin and
terlipressin in septic shock patients. Crit Care 2005; 9:212– 222.
111. Russell JA, Walley KR, Singer J, et al. Vasopressin versus norepinephrine
infusion in patients with septic shock. N Engl J Med 2008; 358: 877– 887.
112. Gordon AC, Russell JA, Walley KR, et al. The effects of vasopressin on acute
kidney injury in septic shock. Intensive Care Med 2010; 36:83– 91.
113. Dellinger RP , Levy MM, Carlet JM, et al. Surviving Sepsis Campaign:
international guidelines for management of severe sepsis and septic shock:2008. Crit Care Med 2008; 36:296– 327.
114. Dellinger RP , Carlet JM, Masur H, et al. Surviving Sepsis Campaign
guidelines for management of severe sepsis and septic shock. Crit Care Med
2004; 32:858– 873.
115. Rivers E, Nguyen B, Havstad S, et al. Early goal-directed therapy in the
treatment of severe sepsis and septic shock. NE n g lJM e d 2001; 345: 1368– 1377.
116. Mikkelsen ME, Miltiades AN, Gaieski DF, et al. Serum lactate is associated
with mortality in severe sepsis independent of organ failure and shock.Crit Care Med 2009; 37:1670– 1677.
117. Phua J, Koay ES, Lee KH. Lactate, procalcitonin, and amino-terminal pro-
B-type natriuretic peptide versus cytokine measurements and clinical
severity scores for prognostication in septic shock. Shock 2008; 29:328– 333.
118.
Jones AE, Focht A, Horton JM, et al. Prospective external validation of the
clinical effectiveness of an emergency department-based early goal-directedtherapy protocol for severe sepsis and septic shock. Chest 2007; 132:
425– 432.
119. Lin SM, Huang CD, Lin HC, et al. A modiﬁed goal-directed protocol
improves clinical outcomes in intensive care unit patients with septic shock:a randomized controlled trial. Shock 2006; 26:551– 557.
120. Nguyen HB, Corbett SW, Menes K, et al. Early goal-directed therapy,
corticosteroid, and recombinant human activated protein C for the
treatment of severe sepsis and septic shock in the emergency department.
Acad Emerg Med 2006; 13:109– 113.
121. Rhodes A, Bennett ED. Early goal-directed therapy: an evidence-based
review. Crit Care Med 2004; 32:S448– 450.
122. Rivers EP , Coba V , Whitmill M. Early goal-directed therapy in severe sepsis
and septic shock: a contemporary review of the literature. Curr Opin
Anaesthesiol 2008; 21:128– 140.
123. Ho BC, Bellomo R, McGain F, et al. The incidence and outcome of septic
shock patients in the absence of early-goal directed therapy. Crit Care 2006;
10:R80.
124. Donati A, Loggi S, Preiser JC, et al. Goal-directed intraoperative therapy
reduces morbidity and length of hospital stay in high-risk surgical patients.Chest 2007; 132: 1817– 1824.
125. Lobo SM, Salgado PF, Castillo VG, et al. Effects of maximizing oxygen
delivery on morbidity and mortality in high-risk surgical patients. Crit Care
Med 2000; 28:3396– 3404.
126. Shoemaker WC, Appel PL, Kram HB, et al. Prospective trial of supranormal
values of survivors as therapeutic goals in high-risk surgical patients. Chest
1988; 94:1176– 1186.
127. Brienza N, Giglio MT, Marucci M, et al. Does perioperative hemodynamic
optimization protect renal function in surgical patients? A meta-analytic
study. Crit Care Med 2009; 37:2079– 2090.
128. Gattinoni L, Brazzi L, Pelosi P , et al. A trial of goal-oriented hemodynamic
therapy in critically ill patients. SvO2 Collaborative Group. NE n g lJM e d
1995; 333: 1025– 1032.
129. Hayes MA, Timmins AC, Y au EH, et al. Elevation of systemic oxygen
delivery in the treatment of critically ill patients. N Engl J Med 1994; 330:
1717– 1722.
130. Section VII. Acute renal failure. In: Schrier RW (ed). Diseases of the Kidney
and Urinary Tract , 8th Edn, vol. 2. Lippincott Williams & Wilkins:
Philadelphia,
PA, 2007, pp 930– 1207.
131. Part VI. Diagnosis and management of speciﬁc disorders. In: Jorres A,
Ronco C, Kellum JA (eds). Management of Acute Kidney Problems , 1st Edn.
Springer: New Y ork, NY, 2010, pp 269– 467.132. Murugan R, Kellum JA. Acute kidney injury: what’s the prognosis? Nat Rev
Nephrol 2011; 7:209– 217.
133. Siew ED, Himmelfarb J. Metabolic and nutritional complications of acute
kidney injury. In: Himmelfarb J, Sayegh MH (eds). Chronic Kidney Disease,
Dialysis, and Transplantation. A Companion to Brenner and Rector’s The
Kidney , 3rd Edn: London, UK, 2011, pp 654– 667.
134. Van Cromphaut SJ. Hyperglycaemia as part of the stress response: the
underlying mechanisms. Best Pract Res Clin Anaesthesiol 2009; 23:375– 386.
135. Kosiborod M, Inzucchi SE, Goyal A, et al. Relationship between
spontaneous and iatrogenic hypoglycemia and mortality in patientshospitalized with acute myocardial infarction. JAMA 2009; 301: 1556– 1564.
136. Kosiborod M, Rathore SS, Inzucchi SE, et al. Admission glucose and
mortality in elderly patients hospitalized with acute myocardial infarction:implications for patients with and without recognized diabetes. Circulation
2005; 111: 3078– 3086.
137. Inzucchi SE, Siegel MD. Glucose control in the ICU–how tight is too tight?
N Engl J Med 2009; 360: 1346– 1349.
138. van den Berghe G, Wouters P , Weekers F, et al. Intensive insulin therapy in
the critically ill patients. N Engl J Med 2001; 345: 1359– 1367.
139. Palevsky PM, Murray PT. Acute kidney injury and critical care nephrology.
NephSAP 2006; 5(2): 72– 120.
140. Van den Berghe G, Wouters PJ, Kesteloot K, et al. Analysis of healthcare
resource utilization with intensive insulin therapy in critically ill patients.Crit Care Med 2006; 34:612– 616.
141. Van den Berghe G, Wilmer A, Hermans G, et al. Intensive insulin therapy in
the medical ICU. N Engl J Med 2006; 354: 449– 461.
142. Schetz M, Vanhorebeek I, Wouters PJ, et al. Tight blood glucose control is
renoprotective in critically ill patients. J Am Soc Nephrol 2008; 19:571– 578.
143. Gandhi GY, Nuttall GA, Abel MD, et al. Intensive intraoperative insulin
therapy versus conventional glucose management during cardiac surgery: arandomized trial. Ann Intern Med 2007; 146: 233– 243.
144. Mangano CM, Diamondstone LS, Ramsay JG, et al. Renal dysfunction after
myocardial revascularization: risk factors, adverse outcomes, and hospitalresource utilization. The Multicenter Study of Perioperative Ischemia
Research Group. Ann Intern Med 1998; 128: 194– 203.
145. Thomas G, Rojas MC, Epstein SK, et
 al.Insulin therapy and acute kidney
injury in critically ill patients a systematic review. Nephrol Dial Transplant
2007; 22:2849– 2855.
146. Wiener RS, Wiener DC, Larson RJ. Beneﬁts and risks of tight glucose
control in critically ill adults: a meta-analysis. JAMA 2008; 300: 933– 944.
147. Bellomo R. Does intensive insulin therapy protect renal function in
critically ill patients? Nat Clin Pract Nephrol 2008; 4:412– 413.
148. Finfer S, Chittock DR, Su SY, et al. Intensive versus conventional glucose
control in critically ill patients. N Engl J Med 2009; 360: 1283– 1297.
149. Van den Berghe G, Schetz M, Vlasselaers D, et al. Clinical review: Intensive
insulin therapy in critically ill patients: NICE-SUGAR or Leuven bloodglucose target? J Clin Endocrinol Metab 2009; 94:3163– 3170.
150. Griesdale DE, de Souza RJ, van Dam RM, et al. Intensive insulin therapy
and mortality among critically ill patients: a meta-analysis including
NICE-SUGAR study data. CMAJ 2009; 180: 821– 827.
151. Fiaccadori E, Lombardi M, Leonardi S, et al. Prevalence and clinical
outcome associated with preexisting malnutrition in acute renal failure: aprospective cohort study. J Am Soc Nephrol 1999; 10:581– 593.
152. Btaiche IF, Mohammad RA, Alaniz C, et al. Amino Acid requirements in
critically ill patients with acute kidney injury treated with continuous renal
replacement therapy. Pharmacotherapy 2008; 28:600– 613.
153. Cano N, Fiaccadori E, Tesinsky P , et al. ESPEN Guidelines on Enteral
Nutrition: Adult renal failure. Clin Nutr 2006; 25:295– 310.
154. Druml W. Nutritional management of acute renal failure. JR e nN u t r 2005;
15:63– 70.
155. McClave SA, Hurt RT. Clinical guidelines and nutrition therapy: better
understanding and greater application to patient care. Crit Care Clin 2010;
26:451– 466, viii.
156. McClave SA, Martindale RG, Vanek VW, et al. Guidelines for the Provision
and Assessment of Nutrition Support Therapy in the Adult Critically Ill
Patient: Society of Critical Care Medicine (SCCM) and American Societyfor Parenteral and Enteral Nutrition (A.S.P .E.N.). JPEN J Parenter Enteral
Nutr 2009; 33:277– 316.
157. Fiaccadori E, Regolisti G, Cabassi A. Speciﬁc nutritional problems in acute
kidney injury, treated with non-dialysis and dialytic modalities. NDT Plus
2010; 3:1– 7.
158. Basi S, Pupim LB, Simmons EM, et al. Insulin resistance in critically ill
patients with acute renal failure. Am J Physiol Renal Physiol 2005; 289:
F259–
264.
159. May RC, Clark AS, Goheer MA, et al. Speciﬁc defects in insulin-mediated
muscle metabolism in acute uremia. Kidney Int 1985; 28:490– 497.
126 Kidney International Supplements (2012) 2, 124–138references
160. Cianciaruso B, Bellizzi V, Napoli R, et al. Hepatic uptake and release of
glucose, lactate, and amino acids in acutely uremic dogs. Metabolism 1991;
40:261– 269.
161. Druml W, Mitch WE. Metabolic abnormalities in acute renal failure. Semin
Dial 1996; 9:484– 490.
162. Schneeweiss B, Graninger W, Stockenhuber F, et al. Energy metabolism in
acute and chronic renal failure. Am J Clin Nutr 1990; 52:596– 601.
163. Macias WL, Alaka KJ, Murphy MH, et al. Impact of the nutritional regimen
on protein catabolism and nitrogen balance in patients with acute renal
failure. JPEN J Parenter Enteral Nutr 1996; 20:56– 62.
164. Fiaccadori E, Maggiore U, Rotelli C, et al. Effects of different energy intakes
on nitrogen balance in patients with acute renal failure: a pilot study.
Nephrol Dial Transplant 2005; 20:1976– 1980.
165. Fiaccadori E, Cremaschi E. Nutritional assessment and support in acute
kidney injury. Curr Opin Crit Care 2009; 15:474– 480.
166. Powell-Tuck J. Nutritional interventions in critical illness. Proc Nutr Soc
2007; 66:16– 24.
167. Scheinkestel CD, Adams F, Mahony L, et al. Impact of increasing parenteral
protein loads on amino acid levels and balance in critically ill anuric
patients on continuous renal replacement therapy. Nutrition 2003; 19:
733– 740.
168. Bellomo R, Tan HK, Bhonagiri S, et al. High protein intake during
continuous hemodiaﬁltration: impact on amino acids and nitrogen balance.Int J Artif Organs 2002; 25:261– 268.
169. Druml W. Metabolic aspects of continuous renal replacement therapies.
Kidney Int Suppl 1999 :S56– 61.
170. Chima CS, Meyer L, Hummell AC, et al. Protein catabolic rate in patients
with acute renal failure on continuous arteriovenous hemoﬁltration andtotal parenteral nutrition. J Am Soc Nephrol 1993; 3:1516– 1521.
171. Leblanc M, Garred LJ, Cardinal J, et al. Catabolism in critical illness:
estimation from urea nitrogen appearance and creatinine productionduring continuous renal replacement therapy. Am J Kidney Dis 1998; 32:
444– 453.
172. Marshall MR, Golper TA, Shaver MJ, et al. Urea kinetics during sustained
low-efﬁciency dialysis in critically ill patients requiring renal replacementtherapy. Am J Kidney Dis 2002; 39:556– 570.
173. Salahudeen AK, Kumar V , Madan N, et al. Sustained low efﬁciency dialysis
in the continuous mode (C-SLED): dialysis efﬁcacy, clinical outcomes, and
survival predictors in critically ill cancer patients. Clin J Am Soc Nephrol
2009; 4:1338–
 1346.
174. Barnert J, Dumitrascu D, Neeser G, et al. Gastric emptying of a liquid meal
in intensive care unit patients (abstr). Gastroenterology 1998; 114: A865.
175. Fiaccadori E, Maggiore U, Clima B, et al. Incidence, risk factors, and
prognosis of gastrointestinal hemorrhage complicating acute renal failure.
Kidney Int 2001; 59:1510– 1519.
176. Metnitz PG, Krenn CG, Steltzer H, et al. Effect of acute renal failure
requiring renal replacement therapy on outcome in critically ill patients.Crit Care Med 2002; 30:2051– 2058.
177. Scheinkestel CD, Kar L, Marshall K, et al. Prospective randomized trial to
assess caloric and protein needs of critically Ill, anuric, ventilated patientsrequiring continuous renal replacement therapy. Nutrition 2003; 19:
909– 916.
178. Fiaccadori E, Maggiore U, Giacosa R, et al. Enteral nutrition in patients
with acute renal failure. Kidney Int 2004; 65:999– 1008.
179. Caldwell MD, Kennedy-Caldwell C. Normal nutritional requirements. Surg
Clin North Am 1981; 61:489– 507.
180. Zappitelli M, Goldstein SL, Symons JM, et al. Protein and calorie
prescription for children and young adults receiving continuous renalreplacement therapy: a report from the Prospective Pediatric Continuous
Renal Replacement Therapy Registry Group. Crit Care Med 2008; 36:
3239– 3245.
181. Mehta RL, Pascual MT, Soroko S, et al. Diuretics, mortality, and
nonrecovery of renal function in acute renal failure. JAMA 2002; 288:
2547– 2553.
182. Uchino S, Doig GS, Bellomo R, et al. Diuretics and mortality in acute renal
failure. Crit Care Med 2004; 32:1669– 1677.
183. Karajala V, Mansour W, Kellum JA. Diuretics in acute kidney injury.
Minerva Anestesiol 2009; 75:251– 257.
184. Ponto LL, Schoenwald RD. Furosemide (frusemide). A pharmacokinetic/
pharmacodynamic review (Part II). Clin Pharmacokinet 1990; 18:460– 471.
185. Ponto LL, Schoenwald RD. Furosemide (frusemide). A pharmacokinetic/
pharmacodynamic review (Part I). Clin Pharmacokinet 1990; 18:381– 408.
186. Ludens JH, Hook JB, Brody MJ, et al. Enhancement of renal blood ﬂow by
furosemide. J Pharmacol Exp Ther 1968; 163: 456– 460.
187. Ludens JH, Williamson HE. Effect of furosemide on renal blood ﬂow in the
conscious dog. Proc Soc Exp Biol Med 1970; 133: 513–
 515.188. Cantarovich F, Rangoonwala B, Lorenz H, et al. High-dose furosemide for
established ARF: a prospective, randomized, double-blind, placebo-
controlled, multicenter trial. Am J Kidney Dis 2004; 44:402– 409.
189. Lassnigg A, Donner E, Grubhofer G, et al. Lack of renoprotective effects of
dopamine and furosemide during cardiac surgery. J Am Soc Nephrol 2000;
11:97– 104.
190. Lombardi R, Ferreiro A, Servetto C. Renal function after cardiac surgery:
adverse effect of furosemide. Ren Fail 2003; 25:775– 786.
191. Solomon R, Werner C, Mann D, et al. Effects of saline, mannitol, and
furosemide to prevent acute decreases in renal function induced byradiocontrast agents. NE n g lJM e d 1994; 331: 1416– 1420.
192. Ho KM, Sheridan DJ. Meta-analysis of frusemide to prevent or treat acute
renal failure. BMJ 2006; 333: 420.
193. Ho KM, Power BM. Beneﬁts and risks of furosemide in acute kidney injury.
Anaesthesia 2010; 65:283– 293.
194. Hager B, Betschart M, Krapf R. Effect of postoperative intravenous loop
diuretic on renal function after major surgery. Schweiz Med Wochenschr
1996; 126: 666– 673.
195. van der Voort PH, Boerma EC, Koopmans M, et al. Furosemide does not
improve renal recovery after hemoﬁltration for acute renal failure incritically ill patients: a double blind randomized controlled trial. Crit Care
Med 2009; 37:533– 538.
196. Uchino S, Bellomo R, Morimatsu H, et al. Discontinuation of continuous
renal replacement therapy: a post hoc analysis of a prospective multicenter
observational study. Crit Care Med 2009; 37:2576– 2582.
197. Weisberg LS, Kurnik PB, Kurnik BR. Risk of radiocontrast nephropathy in
patients with and without diabetes mellitus. Kidney Int 1994; 45:259– 265.
198. Schetz M. Should we use diuretics in acute renal failure? Best Pract Res Clin
Anaesthesiol 2004; 18:75– 89.
199. Yallop KG, Sheppard SV, Smith DC. The effect of mannitol on renal
function following cardio-pulmonary bypass in patients with normalpre-operative creatinine. Anaesthesia 2008; 63:576– 582.
200. Smith MN, Best D, Sheppard SV, et al. The effect of mannitol on renal
function after cardiopulmonary bypass in patients with established renal
dysfunction. Anaesthesia 2008; 63:701– 704.
201. Schnuelle P , Johannes van der Woude F. Perioperative ﬂuid management in
renal transplantation: a narrative review of the literature. Transpl Int 2006;
19:947–
959.
202. van Valenberg PL, Hoitsma AJ, Tiggeler RG, et al. Mannitol as an
indispensable constituent of an intraoperative hydration protocol for the
prevention of acute renal failure after renal cadaveric transplantation.Transplantation 1987; 44:784– 788.
203. Weimar W, Geerlings W, Bijnen AB, et al. A controlled study on the effect
of mannitol on immediate renal function after cadaver donor kidneytransplantation. Transplantation 1983; 35:99– 101.
204. Better OS, Rubinstein I, Winaver JM, et al. Mannitol therapy revisited
(1940– 1997). Kidney Int 1997; 52:886– 894.
205. Sever MS, Vanholder R, Lameire N. Management of crush-related injuries
after disasters. N Engl J Med 2006; 354: 1052– 1063.
206. Vanholder R, Sever MS, Erek E, et al. Rhabdomyolysis. J Am Soc Nephrol
2000; 11:1553– 1561.
207. Bellomo R, Chapman M, Finfer S, et al. Low-dose dopamine in patients
with early renal dysfunction: a placebo-controlled randomised trial.Australian and New Zealand Intensive Care Society (ANZICS) ClinicalTrials Group. Lancet 2000; 356: 2139– 2143.
208. Murray PT. Use of dopaminergic agents for renoprotection in the ICU.
Yearbook of Intensive Care and Emergency Medicine. Springer-Verlag:Berlin, Germany, 2003: 637– 648.
209. Lauschke A, T eichgraber UK, Frei U, et al. ‘Low-dose’ dopamine worsens
renal perfusion in patients with acute renal failure. Kidney Int 2006; 69:
1669– 1674.
210. Kellum JA, M Decker J. Use of dopamine in acute renal failure: a meta-
analysis. Crit Care Med 2001; 29:1526– 1531.
211. Marik PE. Low-dose dopamine: a systematic review. Intensive Care Med
2002; 28:877– 883.
212. Friedrich JO, Adhikari N, Herridge MS, et al. Meta-analysis: low-dose
dopamine increases urine output but does not prevent renal dysfunction ordeath. Ann Intern Med 2005; 142: 510– 524.
213. Murray PT. Fenoldopam: renal-dose dopamine redux? Crit Care Med 2006;
34:910– 911.
214. Cogliati AA, Vellutini R, Nardini A, et al. Fenoldopam infusion for renal
protection in high-risk cardiac surgery patients: a randomized clinical
study. J Cardiothorac Vasc Anesth 2007; 21:847– 850.
215. Landoni G, Biondi-Zoccai GG, Marino G, et al. Fenoldopam reduces the
need for renal replacement therapy and in-hospital death in cardiovascular
surgery: a meta-analysis. J Cardiothorac Vasc Anesth 2008; 22:27– 33.
Kidney International Supplements (2012) 2, 124–138 127references
216. Morelli A, Ricci Z, Bellomo R, et al. Prophylactic fenoldopam for renal
protection in sepsis: a randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled pilot
trial. Crit Care Med 2005; 33:2451– 2456.
217. Aravindan N, Natarajan M, Shaw AD. Fenoldopam inhibits nuclear
translocation of nuclear factor kappa B in a rat model of surgical ischemicacute renal failure. J Cardiothorac Vasc Anesth 2006; 20:179– 186.
218. Aravindan N, Samuels J, Riedel B, et al. Fenoldopam improves cortico-
medullary oxygen delivery and attenuates angiogenesis gene expression in
acute ischemic renal injury. Kidney Blood Press Res 2006; 29:165– 174.
219. Kellum JA. Prophylactic fenoldopam for renal protection? No, thank you,
not for me–not yet at least. Crit Care Med 2005; 33:2681– 2683.
220. Stone GW, McCullough PA, Tumlin JA, et al. Fenoldopam mesylate for the
prevention of contrast-induced nephropathy: a randomized controlled trial.
JAMA 2003; 290: 2284– 2291.
221. Tumlin JA, Finkel KW, Murray PT, et al. Fenoldopam mesylate in early
acute tubular necrosis: a randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlledclinical trial. Am J Kidney Dis 2005; 46:26– 34.
222. Brienza N, Malcangi V, Dalﬁno L, et al. A comparison between fenoldopam
and low-dose dopamine in early renal dysfunction of critically ill patients.Crit Care Med 2006; 34:707– 714.
223. Landoni G, Biondi-Zoccai GG, Tumlin JA, et al. Beneﬁcial impact of
fenoldopam in critically ill patients with or at risk for acute renal failure:a meta-analysis of randomized clinical trials. Am J Kidney Dis 2007; 49:
56– 68.
224. Ricksten SE, Sward K. Atrial natriuretic peptide in acute renal failure.
In: Ronco C, Bellomo R, Kellum J (eds). Critical Care Nephrology , 2nd Edn.
Saunders Elsevier: Philadelphia, PA, 2009, pp 429– 433.
225. Vesely DL. Natriuretic peptides and acute renal failure. Am J Physiol Renal
Physiol 2003; 285: F167– 177.
226. Marin-Grez M, Fleming JT, Steinhausen M. Atrial natriuretic peptide causes
pre-glomerular vasodilatation and post-glomerular vasoconstriction in ratkidney. Nature 1986; 324: 473– 476.
227. Valsson F, Ricksten SE, Hedner T, et al. Effects of atrial natriuretic peptide
on renal function after cardiac surgery and in cyclosporine-treated heart
transplant recipients. J Cardiothorac Vasc Anesth 1994; 8:425– 430.
228. Ratcliffe PJ, Richardson AJ, Kirby JE, et al. Effect of intravenous infusion of
atriopeptin 3 on immediate renal allograft function. Kidney Int 1991; 39:
164– 168.
229. Sands JM, Neylan JF, Olson RA, et al. Atrial natriuretic factor does not
improve the outcome of cadaveric renal transplantation. J Am Soc Nephrol
1991; 1:1081–
 1086.
230. Kurnik BR, Allgren RL, Genter FC, et al. Prospective study of atrial
natriuretic peptide for the prevention of radiocontrast-induced nephro-
pathy. Am J Kidney Dis 1998; 31:674– 680.
231. Allgren RL, Marbury TC, Rahman SN, et al. Anaritide in acute tubular
necrosis. Auriculin Anaritide Acute Renal Failure Study Group. N Engl J
Med 1997; 336: 828– 834.
232. Lewis J, Salem MM, Chertow GM, et al. Atrial natriuretic factor in oliguric
acute renal failure. Anaritide Acute Renal Failure Study Group. Am J Kidney
Dis2000; 36:767– 774.
233. Sward K, Valsson F, Odencrants P , et al. Recombinant human atrial
natriuretic peptide in ischemic acute renal failure: a randomized placebo-controlled trial. Crit Care Med 2004; 32:1310– 1315.
234. Sward K, Valsson F, Sellgren J, et al. Differential effects of human atrial
natriuretic peptide and furosemide on glomerular ﬁltration rate and renal
oxygen consumption in humans. Intensive Care Med 2005; 31:79– 85.
235. Nigwekar SU, Navaneethan SD, Parikh CR, et al. Atrial natriuretic peptide
for management of acute kidney injury: a systematic review and meta-
analysis. Clin J Am Soc Nephrol 2009; 4:261– 272.
236. Forssmann W, Meyer M, Forssmann K. The renal urodilatin system: clinical
implications. Cardiovasc Res 2001; 51:450– 462.
237. Hummel M, Kuhn M, Bub A, et al. Urodilatin: a new peptide with
beneﬁcial effects in the postoperative therapy of cardiac transplant
recipients. Clin Investig 1992; 70:674– 682.
238. Brenner P , Meyer M, Reichenspurner H, et al. Signiﬁcance of prophylactic
urodilatin (INN: ularitide) infusion for the prevention of acute renal failure
in patients after heart transplantation. Eur J Med Res 1995; 1:137– 143.
239. Sackner-Bernstein JD, Kowalski M, Fox M, et al. Short-term risk of death
after treatment with nesiritide for decompensated heart failure: a pooledanalysis of randomized controlled trials. JAMA 2005; 293: 1900– 1905.
240. Sackner-Bernstein JD, Skopicki HA, Aaronson KD. Risk of worsening renal
function with nesiritide in patients with acutely decompensated heart
failure. Circulation 2005; 111: 1487– 1491.
241. Topol EJ. Nesiritide - not veriﬁed. N Engl J Med 2005; 353: 113– 116.
242. Iglesias JI, DePalma L, Hom D, et al. P
redictors of mortality in adult
patients with congestive heart failure receiving nesiritide–retrospectiveanalysis showing a potential adverse interaction between nesiritide and
acute renal dysfunction. Nephrol Dial Transplant 2008; 23:144– 153.
243. Mentzer RM, Jr., Oz MC, Sladen RN, et al. Effects of perioperative nesiritide
in patients with left ventricular dysfunction undergoing cardiac surgery:the
NAPA Trial. J Am Coll Cardiol 2007; 49:716– 726.
244. Ejaz AA, Martin TD, Johnson RJ, et al. Prophylactic nesiritide does not
prevent dialysis or all-cause mortality in patients undergoing high-risk
cardiac surgery. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg 2009; 138: 959– 964.
245. Lingegowda V, Van QC, Shimada M, et al. Long-term outcome of
patients treated with prophylactic nesiritide for the prevention of acutekidney injury following cardiovascular surgery. Clin Cardiol 2010; 33:
217– 221.
246. Hammerman MR. Potential role of growth factors in the prophylaxis and
treatment of acute renal failure. Kidney Int Suppl 1998; 64:S19– 22.
247. Bernhardt WM, Eckardt KU. Physiological basis for the use of
erythropoietin in critically ill patients at risk for acute kidney injury.Curr Opin Crit Care 2008; 14:621– 626.
248. Ding H, Kopple JD, Cohen A, et al. Recombinant human insulin-like
growth factor-I accelerates recovery and reduces catabolism in rats withischemic acute renal failure. J Clin Invest 1993; 91:2281– 2287.
249. Friedlaender M, Popovtzer MM, Weiss O, et al. Insulin-like growth factor-1
(IGF-1) enhances recovery from HgCl2-induced acute renal failure: theeffects on renal IGF-1, IGF-1 receptor, and IGF-binding protein-1 mRNA.J Am Soc Nephrol 1995; 5:1782– 1791.
250. Miller SB, Martin DR, Kissane J, et al. Insulin-like growth factor I
accelerates recovery from ischemic acute tubular necrosis in the rat.Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1992; 89:11876– 11880.
251. Petrinec D, Reilly JM, Sicard GA, et al. Insulin-like growth factor-I
attenuates delayed graft function in a canine renal autotransplantation
model. Surgery 1996; 120: 221– 225; discussion 225– 226.
252. Franklin SC, Moulton M, Sicard GA, et al. Insulin-like growth factor I
preserves renal function postoperatively. Am J Physiol 1997; 272: F257– 259.
253. Hirschberg R, Kopple J, Lipsett P , et al. Multicenter clinical trial of
recombinant human insulin-like growth factor I in patients with acute renalfailure. Kidney Int 1999; 55:2423– 2432.
254. Hladunewich MA, Corrigan G, Derby GC, et al. A randomized, placebo-
controlled trial of IGF-1 for delayed graft function: a human model to study
postischemic ARF. Kidney Int 2003; 64:593–
602.
255. Song YR, Lee T, Y ou SJ, et al. Prevention of acute kidney injury by
erythropoietin in patients undergoing coronary artery bypass grafting:a pilot study. Am J Nephrol 2009; 30:253– 260.
256. Endre ZH, Walker RJ, Pickering JW, et al. Early intervention with
erythropoietin does not affect the outcome of acute kidney injury(the EARLYARF trial). Kidney Int 2010; 77:1020– 1030.
257. Karlowicz MG, Adelman RD. Nonoliguric and oliguric acute renal failure in
asphyxiated term neonates. Pediatr Nephrol 1995; 9:718– 722.
258. Gouyon JB, Guignard JP . Theophylline prevents the hypoxemia-induced
renal hemodynamic changes in rabbits. Kidney Int 1988; 33:1078– 1083.
259. Bakr AF. Prophylactic theophylline to prevent renal dysfunction in
newborns exposed to perinatal asphyxia–a study in a developing country.Pediatr Nephrol 2005; 20:1249– 1252.
260. Bhat MA, Shah ZA, Makhdoomi MS, et al. Theophylline for renal function
in term neonates with perinatal asphyxia: a randomized, placebo-controlledtrial. J Pediatr 2006; 149: 180– 184.
261. Jenik AG, Ceriani Cernadas JM, Gorenstein A, et al. A randomized, double-
blind, placebo-controlled trial of the effects of prophylactic theophylline onrenal function in term neonates with perinatal asphyxia. Pediatrics 2000;
105: E45.
262. Cattarelli D, Spandrio M, Gasparoni A, et al. A randomised, double blind,
placebo controlled trial of the effect of theophylline in prevention ofvasomotor nephropathy in very preterm neonates with respiratory distresssyndrome. Arch Dis Child Fetal Neonatal Ed 2006; 91:F80– 84.
263. Gottlieb SS, Brater DC, Thomas I, et al. BG9719 (CVT-124), an A1
adenosine receptor antagonist, protects against the decline in renal functionobserved with diuretic therapy. Circulation 2002; 105: 1348– 1353.
264. Givertz MM, Massie BM, Fields TK, et al. The effects of KW-3902, an
adenosine A1-receptor antagonist,on diuresis and renal function in patientswith acute decompensated heart failure and renal impairment or diuretic
resistance. J Am Coll Cardiol 2007; 50:1551– 1560.
265. Cotter G, Dittrich HC, Weatherley BD, et al. The PROTECT pilot study:
a randomized, placebo-controlled, dose-ﬁnding study of the adenosine A1
receptor antagonist rolofylline in patients with acute heart failure and renal
impairment. J Card Fail 2008; 14:631– 640.
266. Massie BM, O’Connor CM, Metra M, et al. Rolofylline, an adenosine
A1-receptor antagonist, in acute heart failure. NE n g lJM e d 2010; 363:
1419– 1428.
128 Kidney International Supplements (2012) 2, 124–138references
267. Falagas ME, Kopterides P . Old antibiotics for infections in critically ill
patients. Curr Opin Crit Care 2007; 13:592– 597.
268. Rea RS, Capitano B. Optimizing use of aminoglycosides in the critically ill.
Semin Respir Crit Care Med 2007; 28:596– 603.
269. Roberts JA, Lipman J. Pharmacokinetic issues for antibiotics in the critically
ill patient. Crit Care Med 2009; 37:840– 851.
270. Zahar JR, Rioux C, Girou E, et al. Inappropriate prescribing of
aminoglycosides: risk factors and impact of an antibiotic control team.
J Antimicrob Chemother 2006; 58:651– 656.
271. Bliziotis IA, Michalopoulos A, Kasiakou SK, et al. Ciproﬂoxacin vs an
aminoglycoside in combination with a beta-lactam for the treatment of
febrile neutropenia: a meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials. Mayo
Clin Proc 2005; 80:1146– 1156.
272. Falagas ME, Matthaiou DK, Bliziotis IA. The role of aminoglycosides in
combination with a beta-lactam for the treatment of bacterial endocarditis:a meta-analysis of comparative trials. J Antimicrob Chemother 2006; 57:
639– 647.
273. Falagas ME, Matthaiou DK, Karveli EA, et al. Meta-analysis: randomized
controlled trials of clindamycin/aminoglycoside vs. beta-lactam mono-therapy for the treatment of intra-abdominal infections. Aliment Pharmacol
Ther 2007; 25:537– 556.
274. Glasmacher A, von Lilienfeld-Toal M, Schulte S, et al. An evidence-based
evaluation of important aspects of empirical antibiotic therapy in febrileneutropenic patients. Clin Microbiol Infect 2005; 11 (Suppl 5): 17– 23.
275. Paul M, Benuri-Silbiger I, Soares-Weiser K, et al. Beta lactam monotherapy
versus beta lactam-aminoglycoside combination therapy for sepsis inimmunocompetent patients: systematic review and meta-analysis ofrandomised trials. BMJ 2004; 328: 668.
276. Paul M, Silbiger I, Grozinsky S, et al. Beta lactam antibiotic monotherapy
versus beta lactam-aminoglycoside antibiotic combination therapy forsepsis. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2006 :CD003344.
277. English WP , Williams MD. Should aminoglycoside antibiotics be
abandoned? Am J Surg 2000; 180: 512– 515; discussion 515– 516.
278. Cosgrove SE, Vigliani GA, Fowler VG, Jr., et al. Initial low-dose gentamicin
for Staphylococcus aureus bacteremia and endocarditis is nephrotoxic. Clin
Infect Dis 2009; 48:713– 721.
279. Olaison L, Schadewitz K. Enterococcal endocarditis in Sweden, 1995– 1999:
can shorter therapy with aminoglycosides be used? Clin Infect Dis 2002; 34:
159– 166.
280. Ali BH. Agents ameliorating or augmenting experimental gentamicin
nephrotoxicity: some recent research. Food Chem Toxicol 2003; 41:
1447– 1452.
281.
Bledsoe G, Crickman S, Mao J, et al. Kallikrein/kinin protects against
gentamicin-induced nephrotoxicity by inhibition of inﬂammation andapoptosis. Nephrol Dial Transplant 2006; 21:624– 633.
282. Bledsoe G, Shen B, Y ao YY, et al. Role of tissue kallikrein in prevention and
recovery of gentamicin-induced renal injury. Toxicol Sci 2008; 102: 433– 443.
283. Ekor M, Farombi EO, Emerole GO. Modulation of gentamicin-induced
renal dysfunction and injury by the phenolic extract of soybean (Glycinemax). Fundam Clin Pharmacol 2006; 20:263– 271.
284. Feldman L, Efrati S, Eviatar E, et al. Gentamicin-induced ototoxicity in
hemodialysis patients is ameliorated by N-acetylcysteine. Kidney Int 2007;
72:359– 363.
285. Girton RA, Sundin DP , Rosenberg ME. Clusterin protects renal tubular
epithelial cells from gentamicin-mediated cytotoxicity. Am J Physiol Renal
Physiol 2002; 282: F703– 709.
286. Horibe T, Matsui H, Tanaka M, et al. Gentamicin binds to the lectin site of
calreticulin and inhibits its chaperone activity. Biochem Biophys Res
Commun 2004; 323: 281– 287.
287. Kaynar K, Gul S, Ersoz S, et al. Amikacin-induced nephropathy: is there any
protective way? Ren Fail 2007; 29:23– 27.
288. Martinez-Salgado C, Lopez-Hernandez FJ, Lopez-Novoa JM. Glomerular
nephrotoxicity of aminoglycosides. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol 2007; 223: 86– 98.
289. Montagut C, Bosch F, Villela L, et al. Aminoglycoside-associated severe
renal failure in patients with multiple myeloma treated with thalidomide.Leuk Lymphoma 2004; 45:1711– 1712.
290. Morales AI, Rodriguez-Barbero A, Vicente-Sanchez C, et al. Resveratrol
inhibits gentamicin-induced mesangial cell contraction. Life Sci 2006; 78:
2373– 2377.
291. Parlakpinar H, Koc M, Polat A, et al. Protective effect of aminoguanidine
against nephrotoxicity induced by amikacin in rats. Urol Res 2004; 32:
278– 282.
292. Rougier F, Claude D, Maurin M, et al. Aminoglycoside nephrotoxicity.
Curr Drug Targets Infect Disord 2004; 4:153– 162.
293. Schmitz C, Hilpert J, Jacobsen C, et al. Megalin deﬁciency offers protection
from renal aminoglycoside accumulation. J Biol Chem 2002; 277: 618– 622.294. Walker PD, Barri Y, Shah SV. Oxidant mechanisms in gentamicin
nephrotoxicity. Ren Fail 1999; 21:433–
 442.
295. Watanabe A, Nagai J, Adachi Y, et al. Targeted prevention of renal
accumulation and toxicity of gentamicin by aminoglycoside binding
receptor antagonists. J Control Release 2004; 95:423– 433.
296. Yanagida C, Ito K, Komiya I, et al. Protective effect of fosfomycin on
gentamicin-induced lipid peroxidation of rat renal tissue. Chem Biol
Interact 2004; 148: 139– 147.
297. Baciewicz AM, Sokos DR, Cowan RI. Aminoglycoside-associated nephro-
toxicity in the elderly. Ann Pharmacother 2003; 37:182– 186.
298. Barclay ML, Kirkpatrick CM, Begg EJ. Once daily aminoglycoside therapy.
Is it less toxic than multiple daily doses and how should it be monitored?Clin Pharmacokinet 1999; 36:89– 98.
299. Graham AC, Mercier RC, Achusim LE, et al. Extended-interval aminoglyco-
side dosing for treatment of enterococcal and staphylococcal osteomyelitis.
Ann Pharmacother 2004; 38:936– 941.
300. Kiel PJ, Lo M, Stockwell D, et al. An evaluation of amikacin nephrotoxicity
in the hematology/oncology population. Am J Ther 2008; 15:131– 136.
301. Kraus DM, Pai MP , Rodvold KA. Efﬁcacy and tolerability of extended-
interval aminoglycoside administration in pediatric patients. Paediatr Drugs
2002; 4:469– 484.
302. Nestaas E, Bangstad HJ, Sandvik L, et al. Aminoglycoside extended interval
dosing in neonates is safe and effective: a meta-analysis. Arch Dis Child Fetal
Neonatal Ed 2005; 90:F294– 300.
303. Peloquin CA, Berning SE, Nitta AT, et al. Aminoglycoside toxicity: daily
versus thrice-weekly dosing for treatment of mycobacterial diseases.Clin Infect Dis 2004; 38:1538– 1544.
304. Peters-Volleberg GW, Dortant PM, Speijers GJ. Comparison of tobramycin
nephrotoxicity in young adult and aged female rats. Pharmacol Toxicol
1999; 84:147– 153.
305. Rougier F, Claude D, Maurin M, et al. Aminoglycoside nephrotoxicity:
modeling, simulation, and control. Antimicrob Agents Chemother 2003; 47:
1010– 1016.
306. Rougier F, Ducher M, Maurin M, et al. Aminoglycoside dosages and
nephrotoxicity: quantitative relationships. Clin Pharmacokinet 2003; 42:
493– 500.
307. Rybak MJ, Abate BJ, Kang SL, et al. Prospective evaluation of the effect of
an aminoglycoside dosing regimen on rates of observed nephrotoxicity and
ototoxicity. Antimicrob Agents Chemother 1999; 43:1549–
1555.
308. Smyth AR, Tan KH. Once-daily versus multiple-daily dosing with intra-
venous aminoglycosides for cystic ﬁbrosis. Cochrane Database Syst Rev
2006; 3:CD002009.
309. Ali MZ, Goetz MB. A meta-analysis of the relative efﬁcacy and toxicity
of single daily dosing versus multiple daily dosing of aminoglycosides.
Clin Infect Dis 1997; 24:796– 809.
310. Bailey TC, Little JR, Littenberg B, et al. A meta-analysis of extended-interval
dosing versus multiple daily dosing of aminoglycosides. Clin Infect Dis
1997; 24:786– 795.
311. Barza M, Ioannidis JP , Cappelleri JC, et al. Single or multiple daily doses of
aminoglycosides: a meta-analysis. BMJ 1996; 312: 338– 345.
312. Ferriols-Lisart R, Alos-Alminana M. Effectiveness and safety of once-daily
aminoglycosides: a meta-analysis. Am J Health Syst Pharm 1996; 53:
1141– 1150.
313. Hatala R, Dinh T, Cook DJ. Once-daily aminoglycoside dosing in immuno-
competent adults: a meta-analysis. Ann Intern Med 1996; 124: 717– 725.
314. Munckhof WJ, Grayson ML, Turnidge JD. A meta-analysis of studies on the
safety and efﬁcacy of aminoglycosides given either once daily or as divideddoses. J Antimicrob Chemother 1996; 37:645– 663.
315. Gavalda J, Onrubia PL, Gomez MT, et al. Efﬁcacy of ampicillin combined
with ceftriaxone and gentamicin in the treatment of experimentalendocarditis due to Enterococcus faecalis with no high-level resistance toaminoglycosides. J Antimicrob Chemother 2003; 52:514– 517.
316. Le T, Bayer AS. Combination antibiotic therapy for infective endocarditis.
Clin Infect Dis 2003; 36:615– 621.
317. Tam VH, McKinnon PS, Levine DP , et al. Once-daily aminoglycoside in the
treatment of Enterococcus faecalis endocarditis: case report and review.Pharmacotherapy 2000; 20:1116– 1119.
318. Beauchamp D, Labrecque G. Aminoglycoside nephrotoxicity: do time and
frequency of administration matter? Curr Opin Crit Care 2001; 7:401– 408.
319. Kim MJ, Bertino JS, Jr., Erb TA, et al. Application of Bayes theorem
to aminoglycoside-associated nephrotoxicity: comparison of extended-interval dosing, individualized pharmacokinetic monitoring, and multiple-
daily dosing. J Clin Pharmacol 2004; 44:696– 707.
320. Murry KR, McKinnon PS, Mitrzyk B, et al. Pharmacodynamic characteri-
zation of nephrotoxicity associated with once-daily aminoglycoside.
Pharmacotherapy 1999; 19:1252– 1260.
Kidney International Supplements (2012) 2, 124–138 129references
321. Streetman DS, Nafziger AN, Destache CJ, et al. Individualized pharmaco-
kinetic monitoring results in less aminoglycoside-associated nephrotoxicity
and fewer associated costs. Pharmacotherapy 2001; 21:443– 451.
322. Heintz BH, Matzke GR, Dager WE. Antimicrobial dosing concepts and
recommendations for critically ill adult patients receiving continuous renalreplacement therapy or intermittent hemodialysis. Pharmacotherapy 2009;
29:562– 577.
323. Dovas S, Liakopoulos V, Papatheodorou L, et al. Acute renal failure after
antibiotic-impregnated bone cement treatment of an infected total kneearthroplasty. Clin Nephrol 2008; 69:207– 212.
324. Boyle MP . Adult cystic ﬁbrosis. JAMA 2007; 298: 1787– 1793.
325. Ramsey BW, Pepe MS, Quan JM, et al. Intermittent administration of
inhaled tobramycin in patients with cystic ﬁbrosis. Cystic Fibrosis InhaledTobramycin Study Group. N Engl J Med 1999; 340: 23– 30.
326. Cannella CA, Wilkinson ST. Acute renal failure associated with inhaled
tobramycin. Am J Health Syst Pharm 2006; 63:1858– 1861.
327. Izquierdo MJ, Gomez-Alamillo C, Ortiz F, et al. Acute renal failure
associated with use of inhaled tobramycin for treatment of chronic airwaycolonization with Pseudomonas aeruginosa. Clin Nephrol 2006; 66:
464– 467.
328. Harbarth S, Burke JP , Lloyd JF, et al. Clinical and economic outcomes of
conventional amphotericin B-associated nephrotoxicity. Clin Infect Dis
2002; 35:e120– 127.
329. Ullmann AJ. Nephrotoxicity in the setting of invasive fungal diseases.
Mycoses 2008; 51 (Suppl 1): 25– 30.
330. Wingard JR, Kubilis P , Lee L, et al. Clinical signiﬁcance of nephrotoxicity in
patients treated with amphotericin B for suspected or proven aspergillosis.Clin Infect Dis 1999; 29:1402– 1407.
331. Pai MP , Norenberg JP , Telepak RA, et al. Assessment of effective renal
plasma ﬂow, enzymuria, and cytokine release in healthy volunteersreceiving a single dose of amphotericin B desoxycholate. Antimicrob Agents
Chemother 2005; 49:3784– 3788.
332. Varlam DE, Siddiq MM, Parton LA, et al. Apoptosis contributes to
amphotericin B-induced nephrotoxicity. Antimicrob Agents Chemother
2001; 45:679– 685.
333. Furrer K, Schaffner A, Vavricka SR, et al. Nephrotoxicity of cyclosporine A
and amphotericin B-deoxycholate as continuous infusion in allogenic stemcell transplantation. Swiss Med Wkly 2002; 132: 316– 320.
334. de Rosa FG, Bargiacchi O, Audagnotto S, et al. Continuous infusion of
amphotericin
B deoxycholate: does decreased nephrotoxicity couple with
time-dependent pharmacodynamics? Leuk Lymphoma 2006; 47:1964– 1966.
335. Sundar S, Chakravarty J, Rai VK, et al. Amphotericin B treatment for
Indian visceral leishmaniasis: response to 15 daily versus alternate-dayinfusions. Clin Infect Dis 2007; 45:556– 561.
336. T echapornroong M, Suankratay C. Alternate-day versus once-daily adminis-
tration of amphotericin B in the treatment of cryptococcal meningitis:
a randomized controlled trial. Scand J Infect Dis 2007; 39:896– 901.
337. Kleinberg M. What is the current and future status of conventional
amphotericin B? Int J Antimicrob Agents 2006; 27 (Suppl 1): 12– 16.
338. Saliba F, Dupont B. Renal impairment and amphotericin B formulations in
patients with invasive fungal infections. Med Mycol 2008; 46:97– 112.
339. Ullmann AJ, Sanz MA, Tramarin A, et al. Prospective study of amphotericin
B formulations in immunocompromised patients in 4 European countries.
Clin Infect Dis 2006; 43:e29– 38.
340. Y oo BK, Jalil Miah MA, Lee ES, et al. Reduced renal toxicity of
nanoparticular amphotericin B micelles prepared with partially benzylatedpoly-L-aspartic acid. Biol Pharm Bull 2006; 29:1700– 1705.
341. Alexander BD, Wingard JR. Study of renal safety in amphotericin B lipid
complex-treated patients. Clin Infect Dis 2005; 40 (Suppl 6): S414– 421.
342. Cornely OA, Maertens J, Bresnik M, et al. Liposomal amphotericin B as
initial therapy for invasive mold infection: a randomized trial comparinga high-loading dose regimen with standard dosing (AmBiLoad trial).Clin Infect Dis 2007; 44:1289– 1297.
343. Garbino J, Adam A. Use of high-dose liposomal amphotericin B: efﬁcacy
and tolerance. Acta Biomed 2006; 77 (Suppl 4): 19– 22.
344. Girois SB, Chapuis F, Decullier E, et al. Adverse effects of antifungal
therapies in invasive fungal infections: review and meta-analysis. Eur J Clin
Microbiol Infect Dis 2005; 24:119– 130.
345. Hachem RY, Boktour MR, Hanna HA, et al. Amphotericin B lipid complex
versus liposomal amphotericin B monotherapy for invasive aspergillosis inpatients with hematologic malignancy. Cancer 2008; 112: 1282– 1287.
346. Johansen HK, Gotzsche PC. Amphotericin B lipid soluble formulations vs.
amphotericin B in cancer patients with neutropenia. Cochrane Database
Syst Rev 2000; 3:CD000969.
347. Johnson PC, Wheat LJ, Cloud GA, et al. Safety and efﬁcacy of liposomal
amphotericin B compared with conventional amphotericin B for inductiontherapy of histoplasmosis in patients with AIDS. Ann Intern Med 2002; 137:
105– 109.
348.
Olson JA, Adler-Moore JP , Schwartz J, et al. Comparative efﬁcacies,
toxicities, and tissue concentrations of amphotericin B lipid formulations in
a murine pulmonary aspergillosis model. Antimicrob Agents Chemother
2006; 50:2122– 2131.
349. V eerareddy PR, V obalaboina V . Lipid-based formulations of amphotericin B.
Drugs Today (Barc) 2004; 40:133– 145.
350. Walsh TJ, Finberg RW, Arndt C, et al. Liposomal amphotericin B for
empirical therapy in patients with persistent fever and neutropenia.
National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases Mycoses Study Group.N Engl J Med 1999; 340: 764– 771.
351. Boogaerts M, Winston DJ, Bow EJ, et al. Intravenous and oral itraconazole
versus intravenous amphotericin B deoxycholate as empirical antifungaltherapy for persistent fever in neutropenic patients with cancer who arereceiving broad-spectrum antibacterial therapy. A randomized, controlledtrial. Ann Intern Med 2001; 135: 412– 422.
352. Johansen HK, Gotzsche PC. Amphotericin B versus ﬂuconazole for
controlling fungal infections in neutropenic cancer patients. Cochrane
Database Syst Rev 2002; 2:CD000239.
353. Park SH, Choi SM, Lee DG, et al. Intravenous itraconazole vs. amphotericin
B deoxycholate for empirical antifungal therapy in patients with persistentneutropenic fever. Korean J Intern Med 2006; 21:165– 172.
354. Raad, II, Hanna HA, Boktour M, et al. Novel antifungal agents as salvage
therapy for invasive aspergillosis in patients with hematologic malignancies:
posaconazole compared with high-dose lipid formulations of amphotericin
B alone or in combination with caspofungin. Leukemia 2008; 22:496– 503.
355. Wegner B, Baer P , Gauer S, et al. Caspofungin is less nephrotoxic than
amphotericin B in vitro and predominantly damages distal renal tubular
cells. Nephrol Dial Transplant 2005; 20:2071– 2079.
356. Schwann NM, Horrow JC, Strong MD, 3rd, et al. Does off-pump coronary
artery bypass reduce the incidence of clinically evident renal dysfunctionafter multivessel myocardial revascularization? Anesth Analg 2004; 99:
959– 964, table of contents.
357. Shroyer AL, Grover FL, Hattler B, et al. On-pump versus off-pump
coronary-artery bypass surgery. NE n g lJM e d 2009; 361: 1827– 1837.
358. Seabra VF, Alobaidi S, Balk EM, et al. Off-pump coronary artery bypass
surgery and acute kidney injury: a meta-analysis of randomized controlled
trials. Clin J Am Soc Nephrol 2010; 5:1734– 1744.
359. Efrati S, Dishy V, Averbukh M, et al. The effect of N-acetylcysteine on renal
function, nitric oxide, and oxidative stress after angiography. Kidney Int
2003; 64:2182– 2187.
360. Conesa EL, Valero F, Nadal JC, et al. N-ace
tyl-L-cysteine improves renal
medullary hypoperfusion in acute renal failure. Am J Physiol Regul Integr
Comp Physiol 2001; 281: R730– 737.
361. DiMari J, Megyesi J, Udvarhelyi N, et al. N-acetyl cysteine ameliorates
ischemic renal failure. Am J Physiol 1997; 272: F292– 298.
362. Jiang B, Haverty M, Brecher P . N-acetyl-L-cysteine enhances interleukin-
1beta-induced nitric oxide synthase expression. Hypertension 1999; 34:
574– 579.
363. Nitescu N, Ricksten SE, Marcussen N, et al. N-acetylcysteine attenuates
kidney injury in rats subjected to renal ischaemia-reperfusion. Nephrol Dial
Transplant 2006; 21:1240– 1247.
364. Fishbane S. N-acetylcysteine in the prevention of contrast-induced
nephropathy. Clin J Am Soc Nephrol 2008; 3:281– 287.
365. Van Praet JT, De Vriese AS. Prevention of contrast-induced nephropathy:
a critical review. Curr Opin Nephrol Hypertens 2007; 16:336– 347.
366. Hoffmann U, Fischereder M, Kruger B, et al. The value of N-acetylcysteine
in the prevention of radiocontrast agent-induced nephropathy seemsquestionable. J Am Soc Nephrol 2004; 15:407– 410.
367. Izzedine H, Guerin V, Launay-Vacher V, et al. Effect of N-acetylcysteine on
serum creatinine level. Nephrol Dial Transplant 2001; 16:1514– 1151.
368. Haase M, Haase-Fielitz A, Ratnaike S, et al. N-Acetylcysteine does not
artifactually lower plasma creatinine concentration. Nephrol Dial Transplant
2008; 23:1581– 1587.
369. Mainra R, Gallo K, Moist L. Effect of N-acetylcysteine on renal function in
patients with chronic kidney disease. Nephrology (Carlton) 2007; 12:510– 513.
370. Rehman T, Fought J, Solomon R. N-acetylcysteine effect on serum
creatinine and cystatin C levels in CKD patients. Clin J Am Soc Nephrol
2008; 3:1610– 1614.
371. Molnar Z, Szakmany T, Koszegi T. Prophylactic N-acetylcysteine decreases
serum CRP but not PCT levels and microalbuminuria following majorabdominal surgery. A prospective, randomised, double-blinded, placebo-
controlled clinical trial. Intensive Care Med 2003; 29:749– 755.
372. Niemi TT, Munsterhjelm E, Poyhia R, et al. The effect of N-acetylcysteine
on blood coagulation and platelet function in patients undergoing open
130 Kidney International Supplements (2012) 2, 124–138references
repair of abdominal aortic aneurysm. Blood Coagul Fibrinolysis 2006; 17:
29– 34.
373. Peake SL, Moran JL, Leppard PI. N-acetyl-L-cysteine depresses cardiac
performance in patients with septic shock. Crit Care Med 1996; 24:
1302– 1310.
374. Lynch RM, Robertson R. Anaphylactoid reactions to intravenous
N-acetylcysteine: a prospective case controlled study. Accid Emerg Nurs
2004; 12:10– 15.
375. Appelboam AV , Dargan PI, Knighton J. Fatal anaphylactoid reaction to
N-acetylcysteine: caution in patients with asthma. Emerg Med J 2002; 19:
594– 595.
376. Ho KM, Morgan DJ. Meta-analysis of N-acetylcysteine to prevent acute
renal failure after major surgery. Am J Kidney Dis 2009; 53:33– 40.
377. Adabag AS, Ishani A, Koneswaran S, et al. Utility of N-acetylcysteine to
prevent acute kidney injury after cardiac surgery: a randomized controlled
trial. Am Heart J 2008; 155: 1143– 1149.
378. Burns KE, Chu MW, Novick RJ, et al. Perioperative N-acetylcysteine to
prevent renal dysfunction in high-risk patients undergoing CABG surgery:a randomized controlled trial. JAMA 2005; 294: 342– 350.
379. El-Hamamsy I, Stevens LM, Carrier M, et al. Effect of intravenous
N-acetylcysteine on outcomes after coronary artery bypass surgery:
a randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled clinical trial. J Thorac
Cardiovasc Surg 2007; 133: 7– 12.
380. Sisillo E, Ceriani R, Bortone F, et al. N-acetylcysteine for prevention of
acute renal failure in patients with chronic renal insufﬁciency undergoingcardiac surgery: a prospective, randomized, clinical trial. Crit Care Med
2008; 36:81– 86.
381. Wijeysundera DN, Beattie WS, Rao V, et al. N-acetylcysteine for preventing
acute kidney injury in cardiac surgery patients with pre-existing moderaterenal insufﬁciency. Can J Anaesth 2007; 54:872– 881.
382. Hynninen MS, Niemi TT, Poyhia R, et al. N-acetylcysteine for the
prevention of kidney injury in abdominal aortic surgery: a randomized,
double-blind, placebo-controlled trial. Anesth Analg 2006; 102: 1638– 1645.
383. Macedo E, Abdulkader R, Castro I, et al. Lack of protection of
N-acetylcysteine (NAC) in acute renal failure related to elective aorticaneurysm repair-a randomized controlled trial. Nephrol Dial Transplant
2006; 21:1863– 1869.
384. Komisarof JA, Gilkey GM, Peters DM, et al. N-acetylcysteine for patients
with prolonged hypotension as prophylaxis for acute renal failure(NEPHRON). Crit Care Med 2007; 35:435– 441.
385. Harjai KJ, Raizada A, Shenoy C, et al. A
comparison of contemporary
deﬁnitions of contrast nephropathy in patients undergoing percutaneous
coronary intervention and a proposal for a novel nephropathy grading
system. Am J Cardiol 2008; 101: 812– 819.
386. Thomsen HS, Morcos SK. Contrast media and the kidney: European
Society of Urogenital Radiology (ESUR) guidelines. Br J Radiol 2003; 76:
513– 518.
387. Ribichini F, Graziani M, Gambaro G, et al. Early creatinine shifts predict
contrast-induced nephropathy and persistent renal damage after angio-graphy. Am J Med 2010; 123: 755– 763.
388. Newhouse JH, Kho D, Rao QA, et al. Frequency of serum creatinine changes
in the absence of iodinated contrast material: implications for studies ofcontrast nephrotoxicity. AJR Am J Roentgenol 2008; 191: 376– 382.
389. Baumgarten DA, Ellis JH. Contrast-induced nephropathy: contrast material
not required? AJR Am J Roentgenol 2008; 191: 383– 386.
390. Bruce RJ, Djamali A, Shinki K, et al. Background ﬂuctuation of kidney
function versus contrast-induced nephrotoxicity. AJR Am J Roentgenol
2009; 192: 711– 718.
391. Jabara R, Gadesam RR, Pendyala LK, et al. Impact of the deﬁnition utilized
on the rate of contrast-induced nephropathy in percutaneous coronaryintervention. Am J Cardiol 2009; 103: 1657– 1662.
392. Berns AS. Nephrotoxicity of contrast media. Kidney Int 1989; 36:730– 740.
393. Rudnick MR, Goldfarb S, Tumlin J. Contrast-induced nephropathy: is the
picture any clearer? Clin J Am Soc Nephrol 2008; 3:261– 262.
394. Nash K, Hafeez A, Hou S. Hospital-acquired renal insufﬁciency. Am J
Kidney Dis 2002; 39:930– 936.
395. Polena S, Yang S, Alam R, et al. Nephropathy in critically Ill patients
without preexisting renal disease. Proc West Pharmacol Soc 2005; 48:
134– 135.
396. Becker CR, Davidson C, Lameire N, et al. High-risk situations and
procedures. Am J Cardiol 2006; 98:37K– 41K.
397. Lameire N. Contrast-induced nephropathy in the critically-ill patient: focus
on emergency screening and prevention. Acta Clin Belg Suppl 2007 :
346– 352.
398. McCullough PA. Radiocontrast-induced acute kidney injury. Nephron
Physiol 2008; 109: pp 61– 72.399. Weisbord SD, Chen H, Stone RA, et al. Associatio
 ns of increases in serum
creatinine with mortality and length of hospital stay after coronaryangiography. J Am Soc Nephrol 2006; 17:2871– 2877.
400. McCullough PA, Wolyn R, Rocher LL, et al. Acute renal failure after
coronary intervention: incidence, risk factors, and relationship to mortality.Am J Med 1997; 103: 368– 375.
401. Solomon RJ, Natarajan MK, Doucet S, et al. Cardiac Angiography in
Renally Impaired Patients (CARE) study: a randomized double-blind trial
of contrast-induced nephropathy in patients with chronic kidney disease.
Circulation 2007; 115: 3189– 3196.
402. Freeman RV , O’Donnell M, Share D, et al. Nephropathy requiring dialysis
after percutaneous coronary intervention and the critical role of an adjusted
contrast dose. Am J Cardiol 2002; 90:1068– 1073.
403. Nikolsky E, Mehran R, Turcot D, et al. Impact of chronic kidney disease on
prognosis of patients with diabetes mellitus treated with percutaneous
coronary intervention. Am J Cardiol 2004; 94:300– 305.
404. Vuurmans T, Byrne J, Fretz E, et al. Chronic kidney injury in patients after
cardiac catheterisation or percutaneous coronary intervention: a compa-rison of radial and femoral approaches (from the British Columbia Cardiacand Renal Registries). Heart 2010; 96:1538– 1542.
405. Drey N, Roderick P , Mullee M, et al. A population-based study of the
incidence and outcomes of diagnosed chronic kidney disease. Am J Kidney
Dis2003; 42:677– 684.
406. Katzberg RW, Haller C. Contrast-induced nephrotoxicity: clinical land-
scape. Kidney Int Suppl 2006 :S3– 7.
407. Persson PB. Editorial: contrast medium-induced nephropathy. Nephrol Dial
Transplant 2005; 20 (Suppl 1): i1.
408. Mehran R, Nikolsky E. Contrast-induced nephropathy: deﬁnition, epide-
miology, and patients at risk. Kidney Int Suppl 2006 :S11– 15.
409. Stevens LA, Coresh J, Greene T, et al. Assessing kidney function–measured
and estimated glomerular ﬁltration rate. N Engl J Med 2006; 354:
2473– 2483.
410. Lameire N, Adam A, Becker CR, et al. Baseline renal function screening.
Am J Cardiol 2006; 98:21K– 26K.
411. Choyke PL, Cady J, DePollar SL, et al. Determination of serum creatinine
prior to iodinated contrast media: is it necessary in all patients? Tech Urol
1998; 4:65– 69.
412. McCullough PA, Adam A, Becker CR, et al. Risk
prediction of contrast-
induced nephropathy. Am J Cardiol 2006; 98:27K– 36K.
413. Toprak O. Conﬂicting and new risk factors for contrast induced
nephropathy. J Urol 2007; 178: 2277– 2283.
414. Goldenberg I, Matetzky S. Nephropathy induced by contrast media:
pathogenesis, risk factors and preventive strategies. CMAJ 2005; 172:
1461– 1471.
415. Majumdar SR, Kjellstrand CM, Tymchak WJ, et al. Forced euvolemic
diuresis with mannitol and furosemide for prevention of contrast-induced
nephropathy in patients with CKD undergoing coronary angiography:
a randomized controlled trial. Am J Kidney Dis 2009; 54:602– 609.
416. Barrett BJ, Parfrey PS. Clinical practice. Preventing nephropathy induced by
contrast medium. N Engl J Med 2006; 354: 379– 386.
417. Brown JR, DeVries JT, Piper WD, et al. Serious renal dysfunction after
percutaneous coronary interventions can be predicted. Am Heart J 2008;
155: 260– 266.
418. Mehran R, Aymong ED, Nikolsky E, et al. A simple risk score for prediction
of contrast-induced nephropathy after percutaneous coronary intervention:
development and initial validation. J Am Coll Cardiol 2004; 44:1393– 1399.
419. Perazella MA. Gadolinium-contrast toxicity in patients with kidney disease:
nephrotoxicity and nephrogenic systemic ﬁbrosis. Curr Drug Saf 2008; 3:
67– 75.
420. Perazella MA. Current status of gadolinium toxicity in patients with kidney
disease. Clin J Am Soc Nephrol 2009; 4:461– 469.
421. Briguori C, Colombo A, Airoldi F, et al. Gadolinium-based contrast agents
and nephrotoxicity in patients undergoing coronary artery procedures.Catheter Cardiovasc Interv 2006; 67:175– 180.
422. Ergun I, Keven K, Uruc I, et al. The safety of gadolinium in patients with
stage 3 and 4 renal failure. Nephrol Dial Transplant 2006; 21:697– 700.
423. Erley CM, Bader BD, Berger ED, et al. Gadolinium-based contrast media
compared with iodinated media for digital subtraction angiography inazotaemic patients. Nephrol Dial Transplant 2004; 19:2526– 2531.
424. Kane GC, Stanson AW, Kalnicka D, et al. Comparison between gadolinium
and iodine contrast for percutaneous intervention in atherosclerotic renal
artery stenosis: clinical outcomes. Nephrol Dial Transplant 2008; 23:
1233– 1240.
425. Sam AD, 2nd, Morasch MD, Collins J, et al. Safety of gadolinium contrast
angiography in patients with chronic renal insufﬁciency. J Vasc Surg 2003;
38:313–
318.
Kidney International Supplements (2012) 2, 124–138 131references
426. Swan SK, Lambrecht LJ, T ownsend R, et al. Safety and pharmacokinetic
proﬁle of gadobenate dimeglumine in subjects with renal impairment.
Invest Radiol 1999; 34:443– 448.
427. Kanal E, Broome DR, Martin DR, et al. Response to the FDA’s May 23,
2007, nephrogenic systemic ﬁbrosis update. Radiology 2008; 246: 11– 14.
428. Kay J. Nephrogenic systemic ﬁbrosis: a gadolinium-associated ﬁbrosing
disorder in patients with renal dysfunction. Ann Rheum Dis 2008;
67 (Suppl 3): iii66–69.
429. Wollanka H, Weidenmaier W, Giersig C. NSF after Gadovist exposure: a
case report and hypothesis of NSF development. Nephrol Dial Transplant
2009; 24:3882– 3884.
430. Elmholdt TR, Jørgensen B, Ramsing M, et al. Two cases of nephrogenic
systemic ﬁbrosis after exposure to the macrocyclic compound gadobutrol.NDT Plus 2010; 3:285– 287.
431. Sterling KA, Tehrani T, Rudnick MR. Clinical signiﬁcance and preventive
strategies for contrast-induced nephropathy. Curr Opin Nephrol Hypertens
2008; 17:616– 623.
432. Kelly AM, Dwamena B, Cronin P , et al. Meta-analysis: effectiveness of drugs
for preventing contrast-induced nephropathy. Ann Intern Med 2008; 148:
284– 294.
433. Cigarroa RG, Lange RA, Williams RH, et al. Dosing of contrast material to
prevent contrast nephropathy in patients with renal disease. Am J Med
1989; 86:649– 652.
434. Chen ML, Lesko L, Williams RL. Measures of exposure versus measures of
rate and extent of absorption. Clin Pharmacokinet 2001; 40:565– 572.
435. Sherwin PF, Cambron R, Johnson JA, et al. Contrast dose-to-creatinine
clearance ratio as a potential indicator of risk for radiocontrast-inducednephropathy: correlation of D/CrCL with area under the contrastconcentration-time curve using iodixanol. Invest Radiol 2005; 40:598– 603.
436. Nyman U, Bjork J, Aspelin P , et al. Contrast medium dose-to-GFR ratio: a
measure of systemic exposure to predict contrast-induced nephropathyafter percutaneous coronary intervention. Acta Radiol 2008; 49:658– 667.
437. Laskey WK, Jenkins C, Selzer F, et al. Volume-to-creatinine clearance ratio:
a pharmacokinetically based risk factor for prediction of early creatinine
increase after percutaneous coronary intervention. J Am Coll Cardiol 2007;
50:584– 590.
438. Nyman U, Almen T, Aspelin P , et al. Contrast-medium-induced nephro-
pathy correlated to the ratio between dose in gram iodine and estimatedGFR in ml/min. Acta Radiol 2005; 46:830– 842.
439. Marenzi G, Assanelli E, Campodonico J, et al. Contrast volume during
primary percutaneous coronary intervention and subsequent contrast-
induced nephropathy and mortality. A
 nn Intern Med 2009; 150: 170– 177.
440. Cramer BC, Parfrey PS, Hutchinson TA, et al. Renal function following
infusion of radiologic contrast material. A prospective controlled study.
Arch Intern Med 1985; 145: 87– 89.
441. Heller CA, Knapp J, Halliday J, et al. Failure to demonstrate contrast
nephrotoxicity. Med J Aust 1991; 155: 329– 332.
442. Rao QA, Newhouse JH. Risk of nephropathy after intravenous adminis-
tration of contrast material: a critical literature analysis. Radiology 2006;
239: 392– 397.
443. Barrett BJ, Katzberg RW, Thomsen HS, et al. Contrast-induced nephro-
pathy in patients with chronic kidney disease undergoing computedtomography: a double-blind comparison of iodixanol and iopamidol. Invest
Radiol 2006; 41:815– 821.
444. Katzberg RW, Lamba R. Contrast-induced nephropathy after intravenous
administration: fact or ﬁction? Radiol Clin North Am 2009; 47:789– 800.
445. Katzberg RW, Barrett BJ. Risk of iodinated contrast material–induced
nephropathy with intravenous administration. Radiology 2007; 243:
622– 628.
446. Thomsen HS, Morcos SK. Risk of contrast-medium-induced nephropathy
in high-risk patients undergoing MDCT–a pooled analysis of tworandomized trials. Eur Radiol 2009; 19:891– 897.
447. Ellis JH, Cohan RH. Reducing the risk of contrast-induced nephropathy:
a perspective on the controversies. AJR Am J Roentgenol 2009; 192:
1544– 1549.
448. Goldfarb S, Spinler S, Berns JS, et al. Low-osmolality contrast media
and the risk of contrast-associated nephrotoxicity. Invest Radiol 1993;
28 (Suppl 5): S7– 10; discussion S11– 12.
449. Barrett BJ, Carlisle EJ. Metaanalysis of the relative nephrotoxicity of
high- and low-osmolality iodinated contrast media. Radiology 1993; 188:
171– 178.
450. Aspelin P , Aubry P , Fransson SG, et al. Nephrotoxic effects in high-risk
patients undergoing angiography. NE n g lJM e d 2003; 348: 491– 499.
451. Feldkamp T, Baumgart D, Elsner M, et al. Nephrotoxicity of iso-osmolar
versus low-osmolar contrast media is equal in low risk patients. Clin
Nephrol 2006; 66:322– 330.452. Hardiek KJ, Katholi RE, Robbs RS, et al. Renal effects of contrast media in
diabetic patients undergoing diagnostic or interventional coronaryangiography. J Diabetes Complications 2008; 22:171– 177.
453. Juergens CP , Winter JP , Nguyen-Do P , et al. Nephrotoxic effects of iodixanol
and
iopromide in patients with abnormal renal function receiving N-
acetylcysteine and hydration before coronary angiography and intervention:a randomized trial. Intern Med J 2009; 39:25– 31.
454. Laskey W, Aspelin P , Davidson C, et al. Nephrotoxicity of iodixanol versus
iopamidol in patients with chronic kidney disease and diabetes mellitusundergoing coronary angiographic procedures. Am Heart J 2009; 158:
822– 828 e823.
455. Nie B, Cheng WJ, Li YF, et al. A prospective, double-blind, randomized,
controlled trial on the efﬁcacy and cardiorenal safety of iodixanol vs.iopromide in patients with chronic kidney disease undergoing coronaryangiography with or without percutaneous coronary intervention. Catheter
Cardiovasc Interv 2008; 72:958– 965.
456. Rudnick MR, Davidson C, Laskey W, et al. Nephrotoxicity of iodixanol
versus ioversol in patients with chronic kidney disease: the VisipaqueAngiography/Interventions with Laboratory Outcomes in Renal Insufﬁ-ciency (VALOR) Trial. Am Heart J 2008; 156: 776– 782.
457. Heinrich MC, Haberle L, Muller V, et al. Nephrotoxicity of iso-osmolar
iodixanol compared with nonionic low-osmolar contrast media: meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials. Radiology 2009; 250: 68– 86.
458. Reddan D, Laville M, Garovic VD. Contrast-induced nephropathy and its
prevention: What do we really know from evidence-based ﬁndings?
J Nephrol 2009; 22:333– 351.
459. Jo SH, Y oun TJ, Koo BK, et al. Renal toxicity evaluation and comparison
between visipaque (iodixanol) and hexabrix (ioxaglate) in patients with
renal insufﬁciency undergoing coronary angiography: the RECOVER study:
a randomized controlled trial. J Am Coll Cardiol 2006; 48:924– 930.
460. Mehran R, Nikolsky E, Kirtane AJ, et al. Ionic low-osmolar versus nonionic
iso-osmolar contrast media to obviate worsening nephropathy after
angioplasty in chronic renal failure patients: the ICON (Ionic versus non-ionic Contrast to Obviate worsening Nephropathy after angioplasty in
chronic renal failure patients) study. JACC Cardiovasc Interv 2009; 2:
415– 421.
461. Kuhn MJ, Chen N, Sahani DV , et al. The PREDICT study: a randomized
double-blind comparison of contrast-induced nephropathy after low- orisoosmolar contrast agent exposure. AJR Am J Roentgenol 2008; 191:
151– 157.
462. Thomsen HS, Morcos SK, Erley CM, et al. The ACTIVE Trial: comparison
of the effects on renal function of iomeprol-400 and iodixanol-320 inpatients with chronic kidney disease undergoing abdominal computed
tomography. Invest Radiol 2008; 43:170– 178.
463. Nguyen SA, Suranyi P , Ravenel JG, et al. Iso-osmolality versus low-
osmolality iodinated contrast medium at intravenous contrast-enhanced
CT: effect on kidney function. Radiology 2008; 248: 97– 105.
464. Weisbord SD, Palevsky PM. Prevention of contrast-induced nephropathy
with volume expansion. Clin J Am Soc Nephrol 2008; 3:273– 280.
465.
Persson PB, Hansell P , Liss P . Pathophysiology of contrast medium-induced
nephropathy. Kidney Int 2005; 68:14– 22.
466. Better OS, Rubinstein I. Management of shock and acute renal failure in
casualties suffering from the crush syndrome. Ren Fail 1997; 19:647– 653.
467. Weisbord SD, Mor MK, Resnick AL, et al. Prevention, incidence, and
outcomes of contrast-induced acute kidney injury. Arch Intern Med 2008;
168: 1325– 1332.
468. Stevens MA, McCullough PA, T obin KJ, et al. A prospective randomized trial
of prevention measures in patients at high risk for contrast nephropathy:
results of the P .R.I.N.C.E. Study. Prevention of Radiocontrast Induced
Nephropathy Clinical Evaluation. J Am Coll Cardiol 1999; 33:403– 411.
469. Mueller C, Buerkle G, Buettner HJ, et al. Prevention of contrast media-
associated nephropathy: randomized comparison of 2 hydration regimens
in 1620 patients undergoing coronary angioplasty. Arch Intern Med 2002;
162: 329– 336.
470. Merten GJ, Burgess WP , Gray LV , et al. Prevention of contrast-induced
nephropathy with sodium bicarbonate: a randomized controlled trial.JAMA 2004; 291: 2328– 2334.
471. Caulﬁeld JL, Singh SP , Wishnok JS, et al. Bicarbonate inhibits N-nitrosation
in oxygenated nitric oxide solutions. J Biol Chem 1996; 271: 25859– 25863.
472. Bakris GL, Lass N, Gaber AO, et al. Radiocontrast medium-induced
declines in renal function: a role for oxygen free radicals. Am J Physiol 1990;
258: F115– 120.
473. Halliwell B, Gutteridge JM. Role of free radicals and catalytic metal ions in
human disease: an overview. Methods Enzymol 1990; 186: 1– 85.
474. Assadi F. Acetazolamide for prevention of contrast-induced nephropathy:
a new use for an old drug. Pediatr Cardiol 2006; 27:238– 242.
132 Kidney International Supplements (2012) 2, 124–138references
475. Brar SS, Hiremath S, Dangas G, et al. Sodium bicarbonate for the
prevention of contrast induced-acute kidney injury: a systematic review and
meta-analysis. Clin J Am Soc Nephrol 2009; 4:1584– 1592.
476. Hogan SE, L’Allier P , Chetcuti S, et al. Current role of sodium bicarbonate-
based preprocedural hydration for the prevention of contrast-induced acutekidney injury: a meta-analysis. Am Heart J 2008; 156: 414– 421.
477. Hoste EA, De Waele JJ, Gevaert SA, et al. Sodium bicarbonate for
prevention of contrast-induced acute kidney injury: a systematic review and
meta-analysis. Nephrol Dial Transplant 2010; 25:747– 758.
478. Joannidis M, Schmid M, Wiedermann CJ. Prevention of contrast media-
induced nephropathy by isotonic sodium bicarbonate: a meta-analysis.
Wien Klin Wochenschr 2008; 120: 742– 748.
479. Kanbay M, Covic A, Coca SG, et al. Sodium bicarbonate for the prevention
of contrast-induced nephropathy: a meta-analysis of 17 randomized trials.Int Urol Nephrol 2009; 41:617– 627.
480. Navaneethan SD, Singh S, Appasamy S, et al. Sodium bicarbonate therapy
for prevention of contrast-induced nephropathy: a systematic review and
meta-analysis. Am J Kidney Dis 2009; 53:617– 627.
481. Zoungas S, Ninomiya T, Huxley R, et al. Systematic review: sodium
bicarbonate treatment regimens for the prevention of contrast-induced
nephropathy. Ann Intern Med 2009; 151: 631– 638.
482. Adolph E, Holdt-Lehmann B, Chatterjee T, et al. Renal Insufﬁciency
Following Radiocontrast Exposure Trial (REINFORCE): a randomizedcomparison of sodium bicarbonate versus sodium chloride hydration forthe prevention of contrast-induced nephropathy. Coron Artery Dis 2008; 19:
413– 419.
483. Ozcan EE, Guneri S, Akdeniz B, et al. Sodium bicarbonate, N-acetyl-
cysteine, and saline for prevention of radiocontrast-induced nephropathy.A comparison of 3 regimens for protecting contrast-induced nephropathy
in patients undergoing coronary procedures. A single-center prospective
controlled trial. Am Heart J 2007; 154: 539– 544.
484. Brar SS, Shen AY, Jorgensen MB, et al. Sodium bicarbonate vs sodium
chloride for the prevention of contrast medium-induced nephropathy inpatients undergoing coronary angiography: a randomized trial. JAMA 2008;
300: 1038– 1046.
485. Budhiraja P , Chen Z, Popovtzer M. Sodium bicarbonate versus normal
saline for protection against contrast nephropathy. Ren Fail 2009; 31:
118– 123.
486. Briguori C, Airoldi F, D’Andrea D, et al. Renal Insufﬁciency Following
Contrast Media Administration Trial (REMEDIAL): a randomizedcomparison of 3 preventive strategies. Circulation 2007; 115: 1211– 1217.
487. Maioli M, Toso A, Leoncini M, et al. Sodium bicarbonate versus saline for
the prevention of contrast-induced nephropathy in patients with renaldysfunction undergoing coronary angiography or intervention. J Am Coll
Cardiol 2008; 52:599–
 604.
488. Recio-Mayoral A, Chaparro M, Prado B, et al. The reno-protective effect of
hydration with sodium bicarbonate plus N-acetylcysteine in patientsundergoing emergency percutaneous coronary intervention: the RENOStudy. J Am Coll Cardiol 2007; 49:1283– 1288.
489. From AM, Bartholmai BJ, Williams AW, et al. Sodium bicarbonate is
associated with an increased incidence of contrast nephropathy: a
retrospective cohort study of 7977 patients at mayo clinic. Clin J Am Soc
Nephrol 2008; 3:10– 18.
490. Taylor AJ, Hotchkiss D, Morse RW, et al. PREPARED: Preparation for
Angiography in Renal Dysfunction: a randomized trial of inpatient vsoutpatient hydration protocols for cardiac catheterization in mild-
to-moderate renal dysfunction. Chest 1998; 114: 1570– 1574.
491. Trivedi HS, Moore H, Nasr S, et al. A randomized prospective trial to assess
the role of saline hydration on the development of contrast nephrotoxicity.
Nephron Clin Pract 2003; 93:C29– 34.
492. Y oshikawa D, Isobe S, Sato K, et al. Importance of oral ﬂuid intake after
coronary computed tomography angiography: An observational study.
Eur J Radiol 2011; 77:118– 122.
493. Cho R, Javed N, Traub D, et al. Oral hydration and alkalinization is
noninferior to intravenous therapy for prevention of contrast-inducednephropathy in patients with chronic kidney disease. J Interv Cardiol 2010;
23:460– 466.
494. McCullough PA. Contrast-induced acute kidney injury. J Am Coll Cardiol
2008; 51:1419– 1428.
495. Klein-Schwartz W, Doyon S. Intravenous acetylcysteine for the treatment of
acetaminophen overdose. Expert Opin Pharmacother 2011; 12:119– 130.
496. Thiele H, Hildebrand L, Schirdewahn C, et al. Impact of high-dose
N-acetylcysteine versus placebo on contrast-induced nephropathy andmyocardial reperfusion injury in unselected patients with ST-segmentelevation myocardial infarction undergoing primary percutaneous coronaryintervention. The LIPSIA-N-ACC (Prospective, Single-Blind, Placebo-Controlled, Randomized Leipzig Immediate PercutaneouS CoronaryIntervention Acute Myocardial Infarction N-ACC) Trial. J Am Coll Cardiol
2010; 55:2201– 2209.
497. Trivedi H, Daram S, Szabo A, et al. High-dose N-acetylcysteine for the
prevention of contrast-induced nephropathy. Am J Med 2009; 122:
874.e9– 874.15.
498. Marenzi G, Assanelli E, Marana I, et al. N-acetylcysteine and contrast-
induced nephropathy in primary angioplasty. N Engl J Med 2006; 354:
2773– 2782.
499. Webb JG, Pate GE, Humphries KH, et al. A randomized controlled trial of
intravenous N-acetylcysteine for the prevention of contrast-inducednephropathy after cardiac catheterization: lack of effect. Am Heart J 2004;
148: 422– 429.
500.
Bagshaw SM, McAlister FA, Manns BJ, et al. Acetylcysteine in the
prevention of contrast-induced nephropathy: a case study of the pitfallsin the evolution of evidence. Arch Intern Med 2006; 166: 161– 166.
501. Vaitkus PT, Brar C. N-acetylcysteine in the prevention of contrast-induced
nephropathy: publication bias perpetuated by meta-analyses. Am Heart J
2007; 153: 275– 280.
502. Jo SH, Koo BK, Park JS, et al. N-acetylcysteine versus AScorbic acid for
preventing contrast-Induced nephropathy in patients with renal insufﬁ-
ciency undergoing coronary angiography NASPI study-a prospective
randomized controlled trial. Am Heart J 2009; 157: 576– 583.
503. Brown JR, Block CA, Malenka DJ, et al. Sodium bicarbonate plus
N-acetylcysteine prophylaxis: a meta-analysis. JACC Cardiovasc Interv
2009; 2:1116– 1124.
504. Koc F, Ozdemir K, Kaya MG, et al. Intravenous N-acetylcysteine plus
high-dose hydration versus high-dose hydration and standard hydration forthe prevention of contrast-induced nephropathy: CASIS-A multicenter
prospective controlled trial. Int J Cardiol 2010 :doi:10.1016/j.ijcard.
2010.1010.1041.
505. Arend LJ, Bakris GL, Burnett JC, Jr., et al. Role for intrarenal adenosine in
the renal hemodynamic response to contrast media. J Lab Clin Med 1987;
110: 406– 411.
506. Bagshaw SM, Ghali WA. Theophylline for prevention of contrast-induced
nephropathy: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Arch Intern Med 2005;
165: 1087– 1093.
507. Huber W, Eckel F, Hennig M, et al. Prophylaxis of contrast material-
induced nephropathy in patients in intensive care: acetylcysteine, theophyl-
line, or both? A randomized study. Radiology 2006; 239: 793– 804.
508. Baskurt M, Okcun B, Abaci O, et al. N-acetylcysteine versus N-acetyl-
cysteine þtheophylline for the prevention of contrast nephropathy. Eur J
Clin Invest 2009; 39:793– 799.
509. Malhis M, Al-Bitar S, Al-Deen Zaiat K. The role of theophylline in
prevention of radiocontrast media-induced nephropathy. Saudi J Kidney
Dis Transpl 2010; 21:276– 283.
510. Upton RA. Pharmacokinetic interactions between theophylline and other
medication (Part II). Clin Pharmacokinet 1991; 20:135– 150.
511. Upton RA. Pharmacokinetic interactions between theophylline and other
medication (Part I). Clin Pharmacokinet 1991; 20:66– 80.
512. Stacul F, Adam A, Becker CR, et al. Strategies to reduce the risk of contrast-
induced nephropathy. Am J Cardiol 2006; 98:59K–
 77K.
513. Allaqaband S, Tumuluri R, Malik AM, et al. Prospective randomized study
of N-acetylcysteine, fenoldopam, and saline for prevention of radiocontrast-induced nephropathy. Catheter Cardiovasc Interv 2002; 57:279– 283.
514. Toso A, Maioli M, Leoncini M, et al. Usefulness of atorvastatin (80 mg) in
prevention of contrast-induced nephropathy in patients with chronic renaldisease. Am J Cardiol 2010; 105: 288– 292.
515. Yoshida S, Kamihata H, Nakamura S, et al. Prevention of contrast-induced
nephropathy by chronic pravastatin treatment in patients with cardio-vascular disease and renal insufﬁciency. J Cardiol 2009; 54:192– 198.
516. Deray G. Dialysis and iodinated contrast media. Kidney Int Suppl 2006 :
S25– 29.
517. Cruz DN, Perazella MA, Ronco C. The role of extracorporeal blood
puriﬁcation therapies in the prevention of radiocontrast-induced nephro-pathy. Int J Artif Organs 2008; 31:515– 524.
518. Vogt B, Ferrari P , Schonholzer C, et al. Prophylactic hemodialysis after
radiocontrast media in patients with renal insufﬁciency is potentially
harmful. Am J Med 2001; 111: 692– 698.
519. Reinecke H, Fobker M, Wellmann J, et al. A randomized controlled trial
comparing hydration therapy to additional hemodialysis or N-acetyl-
cysteine for the prevention of contrast medium-induced nephropathy: the
Dialysis-versus-Diuresis (DVD) Trial. Clin Res Cardiol 2007; 96:130– 139.
520. Kawashima S, Takano H, Iino Y, et al. Prophylactic hemodialysis does
not prevent contrast-induced nephropathy after cardiac catheterization in
patients with chronic renal insufﬁciency. Circ J 2006; 70:553– 558.
Kidney International Supplements (2012) 2, 124–138 133references
521. Lee PT, Chou KJ, Liu CP , et al. Renal protection for coronary angiography
in advanced renal failure patients by prophylactic hemodialysis. A
randomized controlled trial. J Am Coll Cardiol 2007; 50:1015– 1020.
522. Marenzi G, Marana I, Lauri G, et al. The prevention of radiocontrast-
agent-induced nephropathy by hemoﬁltration. N Engl J Med 2003; 349:
1333– 1340.
523. Marenzi G, Lauri G, Campodonico J, et al. Comparison of two
hemoﬁltration protocols for prevention of contrast-induced nephropathy
in high-risk patients. Am J Med 2006; 119: 155– 162.
524. Kellum JA, Mehta RL, Levin A, et al. Development of a clinical research
agenda for acute kidney injury using an international, interdisciplinary,
three-step modiﬁed Delphi process. Clin J Am Soc Nephrol 2008; 3:887– 894.
525. Palevsky PM, Baldwin I, Davenport A, et al. Renal replacement therapy and
the kidney: minimizing the impact of renal replacement therapy onrecovery of acute renal failure. Curr Opin Crit Care 2005; 11:548– 554.
526. Allon M, Shanklin N. Effect of albuterol treatment on subsequent dialytic
potassium removal. Am J Kidney Dis 1995; 26:607– 613.
527. Gauthier PM, Szerlip HM. Metabolic acidosis in the intensive care unit.
Crit Care Clin 2002; 18:289– 308.
528. Kraut JA, Kurtz I. T oxic alcohol ingestions: clinical features, diagnosis, and
management. Clin J Am Soc Nephrol 2008; 3:208– 225.
529. Pearlman BL, Gambhir R. Salicylate intoxication: a clinical review. Postgrad
Med 2009; 121: 162– 168.
530. Tyagi PK, Winchester JF, Feinfeld DA. Extracorporeal removal of toxins.
Kidney Int 2008; 74:1231– 1233.
531. Bouman CS, Oudemans-Van Straaten HM, Tijssen JG, et al. Effects of
early high-volume continuous venovenous hemoﬁltration on survival andrecovery of renal function in intensive care patients with acute renal failure:a prospective, randomized trial. Crit Care Med 2002; 30:2205– 2211.
532. Conger JD. A controlled evaluation of prophylactic dialysis in post-
traumatic acute renal failure. J Trauma 1975; 15:1056– 1063.
533. Fischer RP , Griffen WO, Jr., Reiser M, et al. Early dialysis in the treatment of
acute renal failure. Surg Gynecol Obstet 1966; 123: 1019– 1023.
534. Kleinknecht D, Jungers P , Chanard J, et al. Uremic and non-uremic
complications in acute renal failure: Evaluation of early and frequentdialysis on prognosis. Kidney Int 1972; 1:190– 196.
535. Parsons FM, Hobson SM, Blagg CR, et al. Optimum
 time for dialysis in
acute reversible renal failure. Description and value of an improved dialyser
with large surface area. Lancet 1961; 1:129– 134.
536. Gettings LG, Reynolds HN, Scalea T. Outcome in post-traumatic acute
renal failure when continuous renal replacement therapy is applied early vs.
late. Intensive Care Med 1999; 25:805– 813.
537. Demirkilic U, Kuralay E, Y enicesu M, et al. Timing of replacement therapy
for acute renal failure after cardiac surgery. J Card Surg 2004; 19:17– 20.
538. Elahi MM, Lim MY, Joseph RN, et al. Early hemoﬁltration improves
survival in post-cardiotomy patients with acute renal failure. Eur J
Cardiothorac Surg 2004; 26:1027– 1031.
539. Liu KD, Himmelfarb J, Paganini E, et al. Timing of initiation of dialysis in
critically ill patients with acute kidney injury. Clin J Am Soc Nephrol 2006; 1:
915– 919.
540. Bagshaw SM, Uchino S, Bellomo R, et al. Timing of renal replacement
therapy and clinical outcomes in critically ill patients with severe acutekidney injury. J Crit Care 2009; 24:129– 140.
541. Shiao CC, Wu VC, Li WY, et al. Late initiation of renal replacement therapy
is associated with worse outcomes in acute kidney injury after major
abdominal surgery. Crit Care 2009; 13:R171.
542. Brandstrup B, Tonnesen H, Beier-Holgersen R, et al. Effects of intravenous
ﬂuid restriction on postoperative complications: comparison of two
perioperative ﬂuid regimens: a randomized assessor-blinded multicenter
trial. Ann Surg 2003; 238: 641– 648.
543. Foland JA, Fortenberry JD, Warshaw BL, et al. Fluid overload before
continuous hemoﬁltration and survival in critically ill children: a
retrospective analysis. Crit Care Med 2004; 32:1771– 1776.
544. Gillespie RS, Seidel K, Symons JM. Effect of ﬂuid overload and dose of
replacement ﬂuid on survival in hemoﬁltration. Pediatr Nephrol 2004; 19:
1394– 1399.
545. Goldstein SL, Currier H, Graf C, et al. Outcome in children receiving
continuous venovenous hemoﬁltration. Pediatrics 2001; 107: 1309– 1312.
546. Goldstein SL, Somers MJ, Baum MA, et al. Pediatric patients with multi-
organ dysfunction syndrome receiving continuous renal replacementtherapy. Kidney Int 2005; 67:653– 658.
547. Hayes LW, Oster RA, T oﬁl NM, et al. Outcomes of critically ill children
requiring continuous renal replacement therapy. J Crit Care 2009; 24:
394–
400.
548. Sutherland SM, Zappitelli M, Alexander SR, et al. Fluid overload and
mortality in children receiving continuous renal replacement therapy:the prospective pediatric continuous renal replacement therapy registry.Am J Kidney Dis 2010; 55:316– 325.
549. Wiedemann HP , Wheeler AP , Bernard GR, et al. Comparison of two ﬂuid-
management strategies in acute lung injury. NE n g lJM e d 2006; 354:
2564– 2575.
550. Mehta RL, McDonald B, Pahl M, et al. Continuous vs. intermittent dialysis
for acute renal failure in the ICU: Results from a randomized multicentertrial (abstract). J Am Soc Nephrol 1996; 7:1456.
551. Cruz DN, de Cal M, Garzotto F, et al. Plasma neutrophil gelatinase-
associated lipocalin is an early biomarker for acute kidney injury in an adultICU population. Intensive Care Med 2010; 36:444– 451.
552. Hui-Stickle S, Brewer ED, Goldstein SL. Pediatric ARF epidemiology at a
tertiary care center from 1999 to 2001. Am J Kidney Dis 2005; 45:96– 101.
553. Williams DM, Sreedhar SS, Mickell JJ, et al. Acute kidney failure: a pediatric
experience over 20 years. Arch Pediatr Adolesc Med 2002; 156: 893– 900.
554. Picca S, Dionisi-Vici C, Abeni D, et al. Extracorporeal dialysis in neonatal
hyperammonemia: modalities and prognostic indicators. Pediatr Nephrol
2001; 16:862– 867.
555. Proulx F, Fayon M, Farrell CA, et al. Epidemiology of sepsis and multiple
organ dysfunction syndrome in children. Chest 1996; 109: 1033– 1037.
556. Proulx F, Gauthier M, Nadeau D, et al. Timing and predictors of death in
pediatric patients with multiple organ system failure. Crit Care Med 1994;
22:1025– 1031.
557. Picca S, Bartuli A, Dionisi-Vici C. Medical management and dialysis
therapy for the infant with an inborn error of metabolism. Semin Nephrol
2008; 28:477– 480.
558. Picca S, Ricci Z, Picardo S. Acute kidney injury in an infant after
cardiopulmonary bypass. Semin Nephrol 2008; 28:470– 476.
559. Michael M, Kuehnle I, Goldstein SL. Fluid overload and acute renal failure
in pediatric stem cell transplant patients. Pediatr Nephrol 2004; 19:91– 95.
560. Goldstein SL. Advances in pediatric renal replacement therapy for acute
kidney injury. Semin Dial 2011; 24:187– 191.
561. Bagshaw SM, Mortis G, Godinez-Luna T, et al. Renal recovery after severe
acute renal failure. Int
 J Artif Organs 2006; 29:1023– 1030.
562. Bellomo R, Cass A, Cole L, et al. Intensity of continuous renal-replacement
therapy in critically ill patients. N Engl J Med 2009; 361: 1627– 1638.
563. Palevsky PM, Zhang JH, O’Connor TZ, et al. Intensity of renal support in
critically ill patients with acute kidney injury. N Engl J Med 2008; 359: 7– 20.
564. Prendergast TJ, Luce JM. Increasing incidence of withholding and
withdrawal of life support from the critically ill. Am J Respir Crit Care
Med 1997; 155: 15– 20.
565. Swartz R, Perry E, Daley J. The frequency of withdrawal from acute care is
impacted by severe acute renal failure. J Palliat Med 2004; 7:676– 682.
566. Ho KM, Liang J, Hughes T, et al. Withholding and withdrawal of therapy in
patients with acute renal injury: a retrospective cohort study. Anaesth
Intensive Care 2003; 31:509– 513.
567. Shealy CB, Campbell RC, Hey JC, et al. 24-hr creatinine clearance as a guide
for CRRT withdrawal: a retrospective study (abstr). Blood Purif 2003;
21:192.
568. Wu VC, Ko WJ, Chang HW, et al. Risk factors of early redialysis after
weaning from postoperative acute renal replacement therapy. Intensive Care
Med 2008; 34:101– 108.
569. Askenazi DJ, Feig DI, Graham NM, et al. 3– 5 year longitudinal follow-up of
pediatric patients after acute renal failure. Kidney Int 2006; 69:184– 189.
570. Symons JM, Chua AN, Somers MJ, et al. Demographic characteristics of
pediatric continuous renal replacement therapy: a report of the prospectivepediatric continuous renal replacement therapy registry. Clin J Am Soc
Nephrol 2007; 2:732– 738.
571. Schetz M. Anticoagulation in continuous renal replacement therapy.
Contrib Nephrol 2001; 132: 283– 303.
572. Bellomo R, Parkin G, Love J, et al. Use of continuous haemodiaﬁltration:
an approach to the management of acute renal failure in the critically ill.Am J Nephrol 1992; 12:240– 245.
573. Morabito S, Guzzo I, Solazzo A, et al. Continuous renal replacement
therapies: anticoagulation in the critically ill at high risk of bleeding.J Nephrol 2003; 16:566– 571.
574. Tan HK, Baldwin I, Bellomo R. Continuous veno-venous hemoﬁltration
without anticoagulation in high-risk patients. Intensive Care Med 2000; 26:
1652–
1657.
575. Uchino S, Fealy N, Baldwin I, et al. Continuous venovenous hemoﬁltration
without anticoagulation. ASAIO J 2004; 50:76– 80.
576. Agarwal B, Shaw S, Hari MS, et al. Continuous renal replacement therapy
(CRRT) in patients with liver disease: is circuit life different? J Hepatol 2009;
51:504– 509.
577. Davies H, Leslie G. Maintaining the CRRT circuit: non-anticoagulant
alternatives. Aust Crit Care 2006; 19:133– 138.
134 Kidney International Supplements (2012) 2, 124–138references
578. Joannidis M, Oudemans-van Straaten HM. Clinical review: Patency of the
circuit in continuous renal replacement therapy. Crit Care 2007; 11:218.
579. Davenport A. Review article: Low-molecular-weight heparin as an
alternative anticoagulant to unfractionated heparin for routine outpatient
haemodialysis treatments. Nephrology (Carlton) 2009; 14:455– 461.
580. Hirsh J, Bauer KA, Donati MB, et al. Parenteral anticoagulants: American
College of Chest Physicians Evidence-Based Clinical Practice Guidelines
(8th Edition). Chest 2008; 133: 141S– 159S.
581. Warkentin TE, Greinacher A, Koster A, et al. Treatment and prevention of
heparin-induced thrombocytopenia: American College of Chest PhysiciansEvidence-Based Clinical Practice Guidelines (8th Edition). Chest 2008; 133:
340S– 380S.
582. Baglin T, Barrowcliffe TW, Cohen A, et al. Guidelines on the use and
monitoring of heparin. Br J Haematol 2006; 133: 19– 34.
583. Gray E, Mulloy B, Barrowcliffe TW. Heparin and low-molecular-weight
heparin. Thromb Haemost 2008; 99:807– 818.
584. Martel N, Lee J, Wells PS. Risk for heparin-induced thrombocytopenia with
unfractionated and low-molecular-weight heparin thromboprophylaxis:a meta-analysis. Blood 2005; 106: 2710– 2715.
585. Davenport A, Tolwani A. Citrate anticoagulation for continuous renal
replacement therapy (CRRT) in patients with acute kidney injury admitted
to the intensive care unit. NDT Plus 2009; 2:439– 447.
586. Lim W, Cook DJ, Crowther MA. Safety and efﬁcacy of low molecular
weight heparins for hemodialysis in patients with end-stage renal failure:
a meta-analysis of randomized trials. J Am Soc Nephrol 2004; 15:
3192– 3206.
587. European Best Practice Guidelines for Haemodialysis (Part 1). V. Chronic
intermittent haemodialysis and prevention of clotting in the extracorporalsystem. Nephrol Dial Transplant 2002; 17 (Suppl 7): 63– 71.
588. Fischer KG. Essentials of anticoagulation in hemodialysis. Hemodial Int
2007; 11:178– 189.
589. Ouseph R, Ward RA. Anticoagulation for intermittent hemodialysis. Semin
Dial 2000; 13:181– 187.
590. Lim W, Dentali F, Eikelboom JW, et al. Meta-analysis: low-molecular-
weight heparin and bleeding in patients with severe renal insufﬁciency.Ann Intern Med 2006; 144: 673– 684.
591. Akizawa T, Koshikawa S, Ota K, et al. Nafamostat mesilate: a regional
anticoagulant for hemodialysis in patients at high risk for bleeding.
Nephron 1993; 64:376– 381.
592. Matsuo T, Kario K, Nakao K, et al. Anticoagulation with nafamostat
mesilate, a synthetic protease inhibitor, in hemodialysis patients with a
bleeding risk. Haemostasis 1993; 23:135–
 141.
593. Y ang JW, Han BG, Kim BR, et al. Superior outcome of nafamostat mesilate
as an anticoagulant in patients undergoing maintenance hemodialysis withintracerebral hemorrhage. Ren Fail 2009; 31:668– 675.
594. Maruyama H, Miyakawa Y , Gejyo F, et al. Anaphylactoid reaction induced by
nafamostat mesilate in a hemodialysis patient. Nephron 1996; 74:468– 469.
595. Muto S, Imai M, Asano Y. Mechanisms of hyperkalemia caused by
nafamostat mesilate. Gen Pharmacol 1995; 26:1627– 1632.
596. Okada H, Suzuki H, Deguchi N, et al. Agranulocytosis in a haemodialysed
patient induced by a proteinase inhibitor, nafamostate mesilate. Nephrol
Dial Transplant 1992; 7:980.
597. Novacek G, Kapiotis S, Jilma B, et al. Enhanced blood coagulation and
enhanced ﬁbrinolysis during hemodialysis with prostacyclin. Thromb Res
1997; 88:283– 290.
598. Swartz RD, Flamenbaum W, Dubrow A, et al. Epoprostenol (PGI2,
prostacyclin) during high-risk hemodialysis: preventing further bleedingcomplications. J Clin Pharmacol 1988; 28:818– 825.
599. Monchi M, Berghmans D, Ledoux D, et al. Citrate vs. heparin for
anticoagulation in continuous venovenous hemoﬁltration: a prospectiverandomized study. Intensive Care Med 2004; 30:260– 265.
600. Kutsogiannis DJ, Gibney RT, Stollery D, et al. Regional citrate versus
systemic heparin anticoagulation for continuous renal replacement in
critically ill patients. Kidney Int 2005; 67:2361– 2367.
601. Betjes MG, van Oosterom D, van Agteren M, et al. Regional citrate versus
heparin anticoagulation during venovenous hemoﬁltration in patients at
low risk for bleeding: similar hemoﬁlter survival but signiﬁcantly lessbleeding. J Nephrol 2007; 20:602– 608.
601a. Hetzel GR, Schmitz, Wissing H, et al. Regional citrate versus systemic
heparin for anticoagulation in critically ill patients on continuousvenovenous haemoﬁltration: a prospective randomized multicentre trial.Nephrol Dial Transplant 2011; 26:232– 239.
601b. Park JS, Kim GH, Kang CM, et al. Regional anticoagulation with citrate is
superior to systemic anticoagulation with heparin in critically ill patientsundergoing continuous venovenous hemodiaﬁltration. Korean J Intern Med
2011; 26:68– 75.602. Fealy N, Baldwin I, Johnstone M, et al. A pilot randomized controlled
crossover study comparing regional heparinization to regional citrateanticoagulation for continuous venovenous hemoﬁltration. Int J Artif
Organs 2007; 30:301– 307.
603. Oudemans-van Straaten HM, Bosman RJ, Koopmans M, et al. Citrate
anticoagulation
for continuous venovenous hemoﬁltration. Crit Care Med
2009; 37:545– 552.
604. Mehta RL, McDonald BR, Aguilar MM, et al. Regional citrate anti-
coagulation for continuous arteriovenous hemodialysis in critically illpatients. Kidney Int 1990; 38:976– 981.
605. Morgera S, Scholle C, Voss G, et al. Metabolic complications during
regional citrate anticoagulation in continuous venovenous hemodialysis:
single-center experience. Nephron Clin Pract 2004; 97:c131– 136.
606. Thoenen M, Schmid ER, Binswanger U, et al. Regional citrate anti-
coagulation using a citrate-based substitution solution for continuous
venovenous hemoﬁltration in cardiac surgery patients. Wien Klin
Wochenschr 2002; 114: 108– 114.
607. Uchino S, Bellomo R, Morimatsu H, et al. Continuous renal replacement
therapy: a worldwide practice survey. The beginning and ending supportivetherapy for the kidney (B.E.S.T. kidney) investigators. Intensive Care Med
2007; 33:1563– 1570.
608. Apsner R, Schwarzenhofer M, Derﬂer K, et al. Impairment of citrate meta-
bolism in acute hepatic failure. Wien Klin Wochenschr 1997; 109: 123– 127.
609. Durao MS, Monte JC, Batista MC, et al. The use of regional citrate
anticoagulation for continuous venovenous hemodiaﬁltration in acute
kidney injury. Crit Care Med 2008; 36:3024– 3029.
610. Kramer L, Bauer E, Joukhadar C, et al. Citrate pharmacokinetics and
metabolism in cirrhotic and noncirrhotic critically ill patients. Crit Care
Med 2003; 31:2450– 2455.
611. Hetzel GR, Taskaya G, Sucker C, et al. Citrate plasma levels in patients
under regional anticoagulation in continuous venovenous hemoﬁltration.
Am J Kidney Dis 2006; 48:806– 811.
612. Meier-Kriesche HU, Gitomer J, Finkel K, et al. Increased total to ionized
calcium ratio during continuous venovenous hemodialysis with regional
citrate anticoagulation. Crit Care Med 2001; 29:748– 752.
613. Bakker AJ, Boerma EC, Keidel H, et al. Detection of citrate overdose in
critically ill patients on citrate-anticoagulated venovenous haemoﬁltration:
use of ionised and total/ionised calcium. Clin Chem Lab Med 2006; 44:
962– 966.
614. Davies HT, Leslie G, Pereira SM, et al. A randomized comparative crossover
study to assess the affect on circuit life of varying pre-dilution volumeassociated with CVVH and CVVHDF. Int J Artif Organs 2008; 31:221– 227.
615. Holt AW, Bierer P , Bersten AD, et al. Continuo
 us renal replacement therapy
in critically ill patients: monitoring circuit function. Anaesth Intensive Care
1996; 24:423– 429.
616. Joannidis M, Kountchev J, Rauchenzauner M, et al. Enoxaparin vs.
unfractionated heparin for anticoagulation during continuous veno-venoushemoﬁltration: a randomized controlled crossover study. Intensive Care
Med 2007; 33:1571– 1579.
617. Stefanidis I, Hagel J, Frank D, et al. Hemostatic alterations during
continuous venovenous hemoﬁltration in acute renal failure. Clin Nephrol
1996; 46:199– 205.
618. van de Wetering J, Westendorp RG, van der Hoeven JG, et al. Heparin use
in continuous renal replacement procedures: the struggle between ﬁltercoagulation and patient hemorrhage. J Am Soc Nephrol 1996; 7:145– 150.
619. Yang RL, Liu DW. [Clinical evaluation of hemoﬁltration without anti-
coagulation in critically ill patients at high risk of bleeding]. Zhongguo Yi
Xue Ke Xue Yuan Xue Bao 2007; 29:651– 655.
620. Reeves JH, Cumming AR, Gallagher L, et al. A controlled trial of
low-molecular-weight heparin (dalteparin) versus unfractionated heparinas anticoagulant during continuous venovenous hemodialysis withﬁltration. Crit Care Med 1999; 27:2224– 2228.
621. de Pont AC, Oudemans-van Straaten HM, Roozendaal KJ, et al. Nadroparin
versus dalteparin anticoagulation in high-volume, continuous venovenoushemoﬁltration: a double-blind, randomized, crossover study. Crit Care Med
2000; 28:421– 425.
622. Birnbaum J, Spies CD, Klotz E, et al. Iloprost for additional anticoagulation
in continuous renal replacement therapy–a pilot study. Ren Fail 2007; 29:
271– 277.
623. Kozek-Langenecker SA, Spiss CK, Gamsjager T, et al. Anticoagulation with
prostaglandins and unfractionated heparin during continuous venovenoushaemoﬁltration: a randomized controlled trial. Wien Klin Wochenschr 2002;
114: 96– 101.
624. Fabbri LP , Nucera M, Al Malyan M, et al. Regional anticoagulation
and antiaggregation for CVVH in critically ill patients: a prospective,randomized, controlled pilot study. Acta Anaesthesiol Scand 2010; 54:92– 97.
Kidney International Supplements (2012) 2, 124–138 135references
625. Fiaccadori E, Maggiore U, Rotelli C, et al. Continuous haemoﬁltration in
acute renal failure with prostacyclin as the sole anti-haemostatic agent.
Intensive Care Med 2002; 28:586– 593.
626. Langenecker SA, Felfernig M, Werba A, et al. Anticoagulation with
prostacyclin and heparin during continuous venovenous hemoﬁltration.Crit Care Med 1994; 22:1774– 1781.
627. Biancoﬁore G, Esposito M, Bindi L, et al. Regional ﬁlter heparinization for
continuous veno-venous hemoﬁltration in liver transplant recipients.
Minerva Anestesiol 2003; 69:527– 534; 534– 528.
628. Kaplan AA, Petrillo R. Regional heparinization for continuous arterio-
venous hemoﬁltration (CAVH). ASAIO Trans 1987; 33:312– 315.
629. Carr JA, Silverman N. The heparin-protamine interaction. A review.
J Cardiovasc Surg (Torino) 1999; 40:659– 666.
630. Lasocki S, Piednoir P , Ajzenberg N, et al. Anti-PF4/heparin antibodies
associated with repeated hemoﬁltration-ﬁlter clotting: a retrospective study.
Crit Care 2008; 12:R84.
631. Lo GK, Juhl D, Warkentin TE, et al. Evaluation of pretest clinical score
(4 T’s) for the diagnosis of heparin-induced thrombocytopenia in twoclinical settings. J Thromb Haemost 2006; 4:759– 765.
632. O’Shea SI, Ortel TL, Kovalik EC. Alternative methods of anticoagulation for
dialysis-dependent patients with heparin-induced thrombocytopenia.
Semin Dial 2003; 16:61– 67.
633. Davenport A. Anticoagulation options for patients with heparin-induced
thrombocytopenia requiring renal support in the intensive care unit.
Contrib Nephrol 2007; 156: 259– 266.
634. Hursting MJ, Murray PT. Argatroban anticoagulation in renal dysfunction:
a literature analysis. Nephron Clin Pract 2008; 109: c80– 94.
635. Link A, Girndt M, Selejan S, et al. Argatroban for anticoagulation in
continuous renal replacement therapy. Crit Care Med 2009; 37:105– 110.
636. Brophy PD, Somers MJ, Baum MA, et al. Multi-centre evaluation of
anticoagulation in patients receiving continuous renal replacement therapy(CRRT). Nephrol Dial Transplant 2005; 20:1416– 1421.
637. Bunchman TE, Maxvold NJ, Barnett J, et al. Pediatric hemoﬁltration:
Normocarb dialysate solution with citrate anticoagulation. Pediatr Nephrol
2002; 17:150– 154.
638. Bunchman TE, Maxvold NJ, Brophy PD. Pediatric convective hemoﬁltra-
tion: Normocarb replacement ﬂuid and citrate anticoagulation. Am J
Kidney Dis 2003; 42:1248– 1252.
639. Klouche K, Amigues L, Deleuze S, et al. Complications, effects on dialysis
dose, and survival of tunneled femoral dialysis catheters in acute renalfailure. A
m J Kidney Dis 2007; 49:99– 108.
640. National Kidney Foundation. KDOQI clinical practice guidelines and
clinical practice recommendations for 2006 updates: vascular access. Am J
Kidney Dis 2006; 48:S176– S307.
641. O’Grady NP , Alexander M, Dellinger EP , et al. Guidelines for the prevention
of intravascular catheter-related infections. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol
2002; 23:759– 769.
642. Leblanc M, Fedak S, Mokris G, et al. Blood recirculation in temporary
central catheters for acute hemodialysis. Clin Nephrol 1996; 45:315– 319.
643. Little MA, Conlon PJ, Walshe JJ. Access recirculation in temporary
hemodialysis catheters as measured by the saline dilution technique. Am J
Kidney Dis 2000; 36:1135– 1139.
644. Oliver MJ. Acute dialysis catheters. Semin Dial 2001; 14:432– 435.
645. Twardowski ZJ. History of peritoneal access development. Int J Artif Organs
2006; 29:2– 40.
646. Ronco C, Dell’Aquila R. Peritoneal access for acute peritoneal dialysis.
In: Ronco C, Bellomo R, Kellum J (eds). Critical Care Nephrology , 2nd Edn.
Saunders Elsevier: Philadelphia, PA, 2009, pp 1467– 1471.
647. Asif A, Byers P , Vieira CF, et al. Peritoneoscopic placement of peritoneal
dialysis catheter and bowel perforation: experience of an interventionalnephrology program. Am J Kidney Dis 2003; 42:1270– 1274.
648. Maya ID. Ultrasound/ﬂuoroscopy-assisted placement of peritoneal dialysis
catheters. Semin Dial 2007; 20:611– 615.
649. Schmidt SC, Pohle C, Langrehr JM, et al. Laparoscopic-assisted placement
of peritoneal dialysis catheters: implantation technique and results.J Laparoendosc Adv Surg Tech A 2007; 17:596– 599.
650. Cimochowski GE, Worley E, Rutherford WE, et al. Superiority of the
internal jugular over the subclavian access for temporary dialysis. Nephron
1990; 54:154– 161.
651. Schillinger F, Schillinger D, Montagnac R, et al. Post catheterisation vein
stenosis in haemodialysis: comparative angiographic study of 50 subclavianand 50 internal jugular accesses. Nephrol Dial Transplant 1991; 6:
722– 724.
652. Oguzkurt L, Tercan F, T orun D, et al. Impact of short-term hemodialysis
catheters on the central veins: a catheter venographic study. Eur J Radiol
2004; 52:293– 299.653. Taal MW, Chesterton LJ, McIntyre CW. Venography at insertion of
tunnelled internal jugular vein dialysis catheters reveals signiﬁcant occultstenosis. Nephrol Dial Transplant 2004; 19:1542–
1545.
654. Agarwal AK, Patel BM, Haddad NJ. Central vein stenosis: a nephrologist’s
perspective. Semin Dial 2007; 20:53– 62.
655. Puel V , Caudry M, Le Metayer P , et al. Superior vena cava thrombosis
related to catheter malposition in cancer chemotherapy given throughimplanted ports. Cancer 1993; 72:2248– 2252.
656. Yevzlin AS. Hemodialysis catheter-associated central venous stenosis. Semin
Dial 2008; 21:522– 527.
657. Pronovost P . Interventions to decrease catheter-related bloodstream
infections in the ICU: the Keystone Intensive Care Unit Project. Am J
Infect Control 2008; 36:S171 e171– 175.
658. Parienti JJ, Thirion M, Megarbane B, et al. Femoral vs jugular venous
catheterization and risk of nosocomial events in adults requiring acute renal
replacement therapy: a randomized controlled trial. JAMA 2008; 299: 2413– 2422.
659. Hryszko T, Brzosko S, Mazerska M, et al. Risk factors of nontunneled
noncuffed hemodialysis catheter malfunction. A prospective study.Nephron Clin Pract 2004; 96:c43– 47.
660. Liangos O, Rao M, Ruthazer R, et al. Factors associated with urea reduction
ratio in acute renal failure. Artif Organs 2004; 28:1076– 1081.
661. Naumovic RT, Jovanovic DB, Djukanovic LJ. T emporary vascular catheters
for hemodialysis: a 3-year prospective study. Int J Artif Organs 2004; 27:
848– 854.
662. Oliver MJ, Edwards LJ, Treleaven DJ, et al. Randomized study of temporary
hemodialysis catheters. Int J Artif Organs 2002; 25:40– 44.
663. Parienti JJ, Megarbane B, Fischer MO, et al. Catheter dysfunction and
dialysis performance according to vascular access among 736 critically illadults requiring renal replacement therapy: a randomized controlled study.
Crit Care Med 2010; 38:1118– 1125.
664. Marschall J, Mermel LA, Classen D, et al. Strategies to prevent central line-
associated bloodstream infections in acute care hospitals. Infect Control
Hosp Epidemiol 2008; 29 (Suppl 1): S22– 30.
665. Pratt RJ, Pellowe CM, Wilson JA, et al. epic2: National evidence-based
guidelines for preventing healthcare-associated infections in NHS hospitals
in England. J Hosp Infect 2007; 65 (Suppl 1): S1– 64.
666. Kusminsky RE. Complications of central venous catheterization. J Am Coll
Surg 2007; 204: 681– 696.
667. McGee DC, Gould MK. Preventing complications of central venous
cathet
erization. N Engl J Med 2003; 348: 1123– 1133.
668. Hind D, Calvert N, McWilliams R, et al. Ultrasonic locating devices for
central venous cannulation: meta-analysis. BMJ 2003; 327: 361.
669. Randolph AG, Cook DJ, Gonzales CA, et al. Ultrasound guidance for
placement of central venous catheters: a meta-analysis of the literature.Crit Care Med 1996; 24:2053– 2058.
670. Karakitsos D, Labropoulos N, De Groot E, et al. Real-time ultrasound-guided
catheterisation of the internal jugular vein: a prospective comparison withthe landmark technique in critical care patients. Crit Care 2006; 10:R162.
671. Leung J, Duffy M, Finckh A. Real-time ultrasonographically-guided internal
jugular vein catheterization in the emergency department increasessuccess rates and reduces complications: a randomized, prospective study.
Ann Emerg Med 2006; 48:540– 547.
672. Bansal R, Agarwal SK, Tiwari SC, et al. A prospective randomized study to
compare ultrasound-guided with nonultrasound-guided double lumen
internal jugular catheter insertion as a temporary hemodialysis access.
Ren Fail 2005; 27:561– 564.
673. Farrell J, Gellens M. Ultrasound-guided cannulation versus the landmark-
guided technique for acute haemodialysis access. Nephrol Dial Transplant
1997; 12:1234– 1237.
674. Gallieni M. Central vein catheterization of dialysis patients with real time
ultrasound guidance. J Vasc Access 2000; 1:10– 14.
675. Kwon TH, Kim YL, Cho DK. Ultrasound-guided cannulation of the femoral
vein for acute haemodialysis access. Nephrol Dial Transplant 1997; 12:1009– 1012.
676. Lin BS, Huang TP , Tang GJ, et al. Ultrasound-guided cannulation of the
internal jugular vein for dialysis vascular access in uremic patients. Nephron
1998; 78:423– 428.
677. Nadig C, Leidig M, Schmiedeke T, et al. The use of ultrasound for the
placement of dialysis catheters. Nephrol Dial Transplant 1998; 13:978– 981.
678. Zollo A, Cavatorta F, Galli S. Ultrasound-guided cannulation of the femoral
vein for acute hemodialysis access with silicone catheters. J Vasc Access 2001;
2:56– 59.
679. Schummer W, Sakr Y, Schummer C. T owards optimal central venous
catheter tip position. In: Vincent J-L (ed). Intensive Care Medicine . Springer
Verlag: Berlin, Germany, 2008, pp 581– 590.
680. Vesely TM. Central venous catheter tip position: a continuing controversy.
J Vasc Interv Radiol 2003; 14:527– 534.
136 Kidney International Supplements (2012) 2, 124–138references
681. Hsu JH, Wang CK, Chu KS, et al. Comparison of radiographic landmarks
and the echocardiographic SVC/RA junction in the positioning of long-
term central venous catheters. Acta Anaesthesiol Scand 2006; 50:731– 735.
682. James MT, Conley J, Tonelli M, et al. Meta-analysis: antibiotics for
prophylaxis against hemodialysis catheter-related infections. Ann Intern
Med 2008; 148: 596– 605.
683. Jaffer Y, Selby NM, Taal MW, et al. A meta-analysis of hemodialysis catheter
locking solutions in the prevention of catheter-related infection. Am J
Kidney Dis 2008; 51:233– 241.
684. Labriola L, Crott R, Jadoul M. Preventing haemodialysis catheter-related
bacteraemia with an antimicrobial lock solution: a meta-analysis ofprospective randomized trials. Nephrol Dial Transplant 2008; 23:1666– 1672.
685. Y ahav D, Rozen-Zvi B, Gafter-Gvili A, et al. Antimicrobial lock solutions for
the prevention of infections associated with intravascular catheters inpatients undergoing hemodialysis: systematic review and meta-analysis ofrandomized, controlled trials. Clin Infect Dis 2008; 47:83– 93.
686. Hackbarth R, Bunchman TE, Chua AN, et al. The effect of vascular access
location and size on circuit survival in pediatric continuous renalreplacement therapy: a report from the PPCRRT registry. Int J Artif Organs
2007; 30:1116– 1121.
687. Bunchman TE, Brophy PD, Goldstein SL. Technical considerations for renal
replacement therapy in children. Semin Nephrol 2008; 28:488– 492.
688. McDonald SP , Craig JC. Long-term survival of children with end-stage
renal disease. N Engl J Med 2004; 350: 2654– 2662.
689. Chadha V, Warady BA, Blowey DL, et al. Tenckhoff catheters prove superior
to cook catheters in pediatric acute peritoneal dialysis. Am J Kidney Dis
2000; 35:1111– 1116.
690. Auron A, Warady BA, Simon S, et al. Use of the multipurpose drainage
catheter for the provision of acute peritoneal dialysis in infants and
children. Am J Kidney Dis 2007; 49:650– 655.
691. Modi GK, Pereira BJ, Jaber BL. Hemodialysis in acute renal failure: does the
membrane matter? Semin Dial 2001; 14:318– 321.
692. Canivet E, Lavaud S, Wong T, et al. Cuprophane but not synthetic
membrane induces increases in serum tumor necrosis factor-alpha levelsduring hemodialysis. Am J Kidney Dis 1994; 23:41– 46.
693. Marchant A, Tielemans C, Husson C, et al. Cuprophane haemodialysis
induces upregulation of LPS receptor (CD14) on monocytes: role of
complement activation. Nephrol Dial Transplant 1996; 11:657– 662.
694. Patarca R, Perez G, Gonzalez A, et
 al.Comprehensive evaluation of
acute immunological changes induced by cuprophane and polysulfonemembranes in a patient on chronic hemodialysis. Am J Nephrol 1992; 12:
274– 278.
695. Puentes F, Pons H, Rodriguez-Iturbe B. Hemodialysis with cuprophane
membranes is associated with a reduction in peripheral blood mononuclearcells expressing VLA-4 cell adhesion molecule. Clin Nephrol 1994; 42:
278– 279.
696. Schaefer RM, Huber L, Gilge U, et al. Clinical evaluation of a new high-ﬂux
cellulose acetate membrane. Int J Artif Organs 1989; 12:85– 90.
697. Walker RJ, Sutherland WH, De Jong SA. Effect of changing from a cellulose
acetate to a polysulphone dialysis membrane on protein oxidation andinﬂammation markers. Clin Nephrol 2004; 61:198– 206.
698. Itoh S, Susuki C, Tsuji T. Platelet activation through interaction with
hemodialysis membranes induces neutrophils to produce reactive oxygenspecies. J Biomed Mater Res A 2006; 77:294– 303.
699. Hakim RM, Schafer AI. Hemodialysis-associated platelet activation and
thrombocytopenia. Am J Med 1985; 78:575– 580.
700. Sirolli V, Strizzi L, Di Stante S, et al. Platelet activation and platelet-
erythrocyte aggregates in end-stage renal disease patients on hemodialysis.Thromb Haemost 2001; 86:834– 839.
701. Takeshita K, Susuki C, Itoh S, et al. Preventive effect of alpha-tocopherol
and glycyrrhizin against platelet-neutrophil complex formation induced byhemodialysis membranes. Int J Artif Organs 2009; 32:282– 290.
702. Alonso A, Lau J, Jaber BL. Biocompatible hemodialysis membranes for
acute renal failure. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2008 :CD005283.
703. Brophy PD, Mottes TA, Kudelka TL, et al. AN-69 membrane reactions are
pH-dependent and preventable. Am J Kidney Dis 2001; 38:173– 178.
704. Hackbarth RM, Eding D, Gianoli Smith C, et al. Zero balance ultraﬁltration
(Z-BUF) in blood-primed CRRT circuits achieves electrolyte and acid-base
homeostasis prior to patient connection. Pediatr Nephrol 2005; 20:
1328– 1333.
705. Pasko DA, Mottes TA, Mueller BA. Pre dialysis of blood prime in
continuous hemodialysis normalizes pH and electrolytes. Pediatr Nephrol
2003; 18:1177– 1183.
706. Perez-Garcia R, Galan A, Garcia Vinuesa M, et al. Anaphylactoid reactions
during hemodialysis on AN69 membranes: role of ACE inhibitors and
back-ﬁltration. Nephron 1992; 61:123.707. Petrie JJ, Campbell Y, Hawley CM, et al. Anaphylactoid reactions in patients
on hemodiaﬁltration with AN69 membranes whilst receiving ACEinhibitors. Clin Nephrol 1991; 36:264– 265.
708. Tielemans C, Madhoun P , Lenaers M, et al. Anaph
ylactoid reactions during
hemodialysis on AN69 membranes in patients receiving ACE inhibitors.Kidney Int 1990; 38:982– 984.
709. Desormeaux A, Moreau ME, Lepage Y , et al. The effect of electronegativity
and angiotensin-converting enzyme inh ibition on the kinin-forming capacity
of polyacrylonitrile dialysis membranes. Biomaterials 2008; 29:1139– 1146.
710. RENAL Study Investigators. Renal replacement therapy for acute kidney
injury in Australian and New Zealand intensive care units: a practice survey.Crit Care Resusc 2008; 10:225– 230.
711. Gatward JJ, Gibbon GJ, Wrathall G, et al. Renal replacement therapy for
acute renal failure: a survey of practice in adult intensive care units in theUnited Kingdom. Anaesthesia 2008; 63:959– 966.
712. Langford S, Slivar S, Tucker SM, et al. Exploring CRRT practices in ICU:
a survey of Canadian hospitals. Dynamics 2008; 19:18– 23.
713. Rabindranath K, Adams J, Macleod AM, et al. Intermittent versus
continuous renal replacement therapy for acute renal failure in adults.Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2007 :CD003773.
714. Bagshaw SM, Berthiaume LR, Delaney A, et al. Continuous versus
intermittent renal replacement therapy for critically ill patients with acutekidney injury: a meta-analysis. Crit Care Med 2008; 36:610– 617.
715. Pannu N, Klarenbach S, Wiebe N, et al. Renal replacement therapy in patients
with acute renal failure: a systematic review. JAMA 2008; 299: 793– 805.
716. Lins RL, Elseviers MM, Van der Niepen P , et al. Intermittent versus
continuous renal replacement therapy for acute kidney injury patientsadmitted to the intensive care unit: results of a randomized clinical trial.Nephrol Dial Transplant 2009; 24:512– 518.
717. Farese S, Jakob SM, Kalicki R, et al. Treatment of acute renal failure in the
intensive care unit: lower costs by intermittent dialysis than continuousvenovenous hemodiaﬁltration. Artif Organs 2009; 33:634– 640.
718. Klarenbach S, Manns B, Pannu N, et al. Economic evaluation of continuous
renal replacement therapy in acute renal failure. Int J Technol Assess Health
Care 2009; 25:331– 338.
719. Srisawat N, Lawsin L, Uchino S, et al. Cost of acute renal replacement therapy
in the intensive care unit: results from The Beginning and Ending SupportiveTherapy for the Kidney (BEST Kidney) study. Crit Care 2010; 14:R46.
720. Bell M, Granath F, Schon S, et al. Continuous renal replacement therapy is
associated with less chronic renal failure than intermittent haemodialysisafter acute renal failure. Intensive Care Med 2007; 33:773– 780.
721.
Jacka MJ, Ivancinova X, Gibney RT. Continuous renal replacement therapy
improves renal recovery from acute renal failure. Can J Anaesth 2005; 52:
327– 332.
722. Uchino S, Bellomo R, Kellum JA, et al. Patient and kidney survival by
dialysis modality in critically ill patients with acute kidney injury. Int J Artif
Organs 2007; 30:281– 292.
723. Kielstein JT, Schiffer M, Hafer C. Back to the future: extended dialysis for
treatment of acute kidney injury in the intensive care unit. J Nephrol 2010;
23:494– 501.
724. Kielstein JT, Kretschmer U, Ernst T, et al. Efﬁcacy and cardiovascular
tolerability of extended dialysis in critically ill patients: a randomizedcontrolled study. Am J Kidney Dis 2004; 43:342– 349.
725. Baldwin I, Bellomo R, Naka T, et al. A pilot randomized controlled
comparison of extended daily dialysis with ﬁltration and continuous veno-
venous hemoﬁltration: ﬂuid removal and hemodynamics. Int J Artif Organs
2007; 30:1083– 1089.
726. Baldwin I, Naka T, Koch B, et al. A pilot randomised controlled comparison
of continuous veno-venous haemoﬁltration and extended daily dialysiswith ﬁltration: effect on small solutes and acid-base balance. Intensive Care
Med 2007; 33:830– 835.
727. Marshall MR, Creamer JM, Foster M, et al. Mortality rate comparison after
switching from continuous to prolonged intermittent renal replacement foracute kidney injury in three intensive care units from different countries.
Nephrol Dial Transplant 2011; 26:2169– 2175.
728. Fieghen HE, Friedrich JO, Burns KE, et al. The hemodynamic tolerability
and feasibility of sustained low efﬁciency dialysis in the management ofcritically ill patients with acute kidney injury. BMC Nephrol 2010; 11:32.
729. Davenport A. Continuous renal replacement therapies in patients with
acute neurological injury. Semin Dial 2009; 22:165– 168.
730. Bagshaw SM, Peets AD, Hameed M, et al. Dialysis Disequilibrium
Syndrome: brain death following hemodialysis for metabolic acidosis and
acute renal failure–a case report. BMC Nephrol 2004; 5:9.
731. Lin CM, Lin JW, Tsai JT, et al. Intracranial pressure ﬂuctuation during
hemodialysis in renal failure patients with intracranial hemorrhage.
Acta Neurochir Suppl 2008; 101: 141– 144.
Kidney International Supplements (2012) 2, 124–138 137references
732. Ronco C, Bellomo R, Brendolan A, et al. Brain density changes during renal
replacement in critically ill patients with acute renal failure. Continuous
hemoﬁltration versus intermittent hemodialysis. J Nephrol 1999; 12:
173– 178.
733. Paganini EP , Sandy D, Moreno L, et al. The effect of sodium and
ultraﬁltration modelling on plasma volume changes and haemodynamicstability in intensive care patients receiving haemodialysis for acute renalfailure: a prospective, stratiﬁed, randomized, cross-over study. Nephrol Dial
Transplant 1996; 11 (Suppl 8): 32– 37.
734. Schortgen F, Soubrier N, Delclaux C, et al. Hemodynamic tolerance of
intermittent hemodialysis in critically ill patients: usefulness of practiceguidelines. Am J Respir Crit Care Med 2000; 162: 197– 202.
735. Bargman JM. New technologies in peritoneal dialysis. Clin J Am Soc Nephrol
2007; 2:576– 580.
736. Chionh CY, Soni S, Cruz DN, et al. Peritoneal dialysis for acute kidney
injury: techniques and dose. Contrib Nephrol 2009; 163: 278– 284.
737. Ronco C, Amerling R. Continuous ﬂow peritoneal dialysis: current state-of-
the-art and obstacles to further development. Contrib Nephrol 2006; 150:
310– 320.
738. Phu NH, Hien TT, Mai NT, et al. Hemoﬁltration and peritoneal dialysis in
infection-associated acute renal failure in Vietnam. N Engl J Med 2002; 347:
895– 902.
739. Gabriel DP , Caramori JT, Martim LC, et al. High volume peritoneal dialysis
vs daily hemodialysis: a randomized, controlled trial in patients with acutekidney injury. Kidney Int Suppl 2008 :S87– 93.
740. Vachvanichsanong P , Dissaneewate P , Lim A, et al. Childhood acute renal
failure: 22-year experience in a university hospital in southern Thailand.Pediatrics 2006; 118: e786– 791.
741. Bailey D, Phan V, Litalien C, et al. Risk factors of acute renal failure in
critically ill children: A prospective descriptive epidemiological study.Pediatr Crit Care Med 2007; 8:29– 35.
742. Bunchman TE, Maxvold NJ, Kershaw DB, et al. Continuous venovenous
hemodiaﬁltration in infants and children. Am J Kidney Dis 1995; 25:
17– 21.
743. Sadowski RH, Harmon WE, Jabs K. Acute hemodialysis of infants weighing
less than ﬁve kilograms. Kidney Int 1994; 45:903– 906.
744. Symons JM, Brophy PD, Gregory MJ, et al. Continuous renal replacement
therapy in children up to 10 kg. Am J Kidney Dis 2003; 41:984– 989.
745. Warady BA, Bunchman T. Dialysis therapy for children with acute renal
failure: survey results. Pediatr Nephrol 2000; 15:11–
13.
746. Bunchman TE, McBryde KD, Mottes TE, et al. Pediatric acute renal failure:
outcome by modality and disease. Pediatr Nephrol 2001; 16:1067– 1071.
747. Flores FX, Brophy PD, Symons JM, et al. Continuous renal replacement
therapy (CRRT) after stem cell transplantation. A report from theprospective pediatric CRRT Registry Group. Pediatr Nephrol 2008; 23:
625– 630.
748. Noris M, T odeschini M, Casiraghi F, et al. Effect of acetate, bicarbonate
dialysis, and acetate-free bioﬁltration on nitric oxide synthesis: implicationsfor dialysis hypotension. Am J Kidney Dis 1998; 32:115– 124.
749. Levraut J, Ichai C, Petit I, et al. Low exogenous lactate clearance as an early
predictor of mortality in normolactatemic critically ill septic patients.
Crit Care Med 2003; 31:705– 710.
750. Veech RL. The untoward effects of the anions of dialysis ﬂuids. Kidney Int
1988; 34:587– 597.
751. Barenbrock M, Hausberg M, Matzkies F, et al. Effects of bicarbonate- and
lactate-buffered replacement ﬂuids on cardiovascular outcome in CVVH
patients. Kidney Int 2000; 58:1751– 1757.
752. McLean AG, Davenport A, Cox D, et al. Effects of lactate-buffered and
lactate-free dialysate in CAVHD patients with and without liver dysfunc-
tion. Kidney Int 2000; 58:1765– 1772.
753. Thomas AN, Guy JM, Kishen R, et al. Comparison of lactate and
bicarbonate buffered haemoﬁltration ﬂuids: use in critically ill patients.
Nephrol Dial Transplant 1997; 12:1212– 1217.
754. Tan HK, Uchino S, Bellomo R. The acid-base effects of continuous
hemoﬁltration with lactate or bicarbonate buffered replacement ﬂuids.Int J Artif Organs 2003; 26:477– 483.
755. Zimmerman D, Cotman P , Ting R, et al. Continuous veno-venous
haemodialysis with a novel bicarbonate dialysis solution: prospective
cross-over comparison with a lactate buffered solution. Nephrol Dial
Transplant 1999; 14:2387– 2391.
756. Holloway P , Benham S, St John A. The value of blood lactate measurements
in ICU: an evaluation of the role in the management of patients onhaemoﬁltration. Clin Chim Acta 2001; 307: 9– 13.
757. Ledebo I. On-line preparation of solutions for dialysis: practical aspects
versus safety and regulations. J Am Soc Nephrol 2002; 13 (Suppl 1): S78– 83.758. Marshall MR, Ma T, Galler D, et al. Sustained low-efﬁciency daily
diaﬁltration (SLEDD-f) for critically ill patients requiring renal replacement
therapy: towards an adequate therapy. Nephrol Dial Transplant 2004; 19:
877– 884.
759. Ronco C. Backﬁltration in clinical dialysis: nature of the phenomenon,
mechanisms and possible solutions. Int
 J Artif Organs 1990; 13:11– 21.
760. Kanagasundaram NS, Larive AB, Paganini EP . A preliminary survey of
bacterial contamination of the dialysate circuit in continuous veno-venous
hemodialysis. Clin Nephrol 2003; 59:47– 55.
761. Moore I, Bhat R, Hoenich NA, et al. A microbiological survey of
bicarbonate-based replacement circuits in continuous veno-venous hemo-
ﬁltration. Crit Care Med 2009; 37:496– 500.
762. Ward RA. Worldwide guidelines for the preparation and quality manage-
ment of dialysis ﬂuid and their implementation. Blood Purif 2009;
27 (Suppl 1): 2– 4.
763. Association for the Advancement of Medical Instrumentation. Water for
Hemodialysis and Related Therapies . ANSI/AAMI/ISO 13959:2009. AAMI:
Arlington, VA, 2010.
764. Association for the Advancement of Medical Instrumentation. Concentrates
for Hemodialysis and Related Therapies . ANSI/AAMI/ISO 13958:2009.
AAMI: Arlington, VA, 2011.
765. Association for the Advancement of Medical Instrumentation. Quality of
Dialysis Fluid for Hemodialysis and Related Therapies . ANSI/AAMI/ISO
11663:2009. AAMI: Arlington, VA, 2010.
765a. European best practice guidelines for haemodialysis (Part 1). Section IV:
Dialysis ﬂuid purity. Nephrol Dial Transplant 2002; 17 (Suppl): 45– 62.
766. Kolff WJ. First clinical experience with the artiﬁcial kidney. Ann Intern Med
1965; 62:608– 619.
767. Davenport A, Bouman C, Kirpalani A, et al. Delivery of renal replacement
therapy in acute kidney injury: what are the key issues? Clin J Am Soc
Nephrol 2008; 3:869– 875.
768. Faulhaber-Walter R, Hafer C, Jahr N, et al. The Hannover Dialysis Outcome
study: comparison of standard versus intensiﬁed extended dialysis fortreatment of patients with acute kidney injury in the intensive care unit.
Nephrol Dial Transplant 2009; 24:2179– 2186.
769. Ronco C, Bellomo R, Homel P , et al. Effects of different doses in continuous
veno-venous haemoﬁltration on outcomes of acute renal failure:
a prospective randomised trial. Lancet 2000; 356: 26– 30.
770. Saudan P , Niederberger M, De Seigneux S, et al. Adding a dialysis dose
to continuous hemoﬁltration increases survival in patients with acute renalfailure. Kidney Int 2006; 70:1312– 1317.
771. Schifﬂ H, Lang SM, Fischer R. Daily hemodialysis and the outcome of acute
renal failure. N Engl J Med 2002; 346: 305– 310.
772. Tolwani AJ, Campbell RC, Stofan BS, et al. Standard versus high-dose
CVVHDF for ICU-related acute renal failure. J Am Soc Nephrol 2008; 19:
1233– 1238.
773. Paganini EP , Tapolyai M, Goormastic M, et al. Establishing a dialysis
therap
y/patient outcome link in intensive care unit acute dialysis for
patients with acute renal failure. Am J Kidney Dis 1996; 28 (Suppl 3):
S81– S89.
774. Ricci Z, Ronco C, D’Amico G, et al. Practice patterns in the management of
acute renal failure in the critically ill patient: an international survey.Nephrol Dial Transplant 2006; 21:690– 696.
775. Ikizler TA, Sezer MT, Flakoll PJ, et al. Urea space and total body water
measurements by stable isotopes in patients with acute renal failure.
Kidney Int 2004; 65:725– 732.
776. Evanson JA, Ikizler TA, Wingard R, et al. Measurement of the delivery of
dialysis in acute renal failure. Kidney Int 1999; 55:1501– 1508.
777. Evanson JA, Himmelfarb J, Wingard R, et al. Prescribed versus delivered
dialysis in acute renal failure patients. Am J Kidney Dis 1998; 32:731– 738.
778. Schifﬂ H. Disease severity adversely affects delivery of dialysis in acute renal
failure. Nephron Clin Pract 2007; 107: c163– 169.
779. Gotch FA, Sargent JA. A mechanistic analysis of the National Cooperative
Dialysis Study (NCDS). Kidney Int 1985; 28:526– 534.
780. Held PJ, Port FK, Wolfe RA, et al. The dose of hemodialysis and patient
mortality. Kidney Int 1996; 50:550– 556.
781. Eknoyan G, Beck GJ, Cheung AK, et al. Effect of dialysis dose and
membrane ﬂux in maintenance hemodialysis. N Engl J Med 2002; 347:
2010– 2019.
782. Venkataraman R, Kellum JA, Palevsky P . Dosing patterns for continuous
renal replacement therapy at a large academic medical center in the United
States. J Crit Care 2002; 17:246– 250.
783. Boussekey N, Chiche A, Faure K, et al. A pilot randomized study comparing
high and low volume hemoﬁltration on vasopressor use in septic shock.Intensive Care Med 2008; 34:1646– 1653.
138 Kidney International Supplements (2012) 2, 124–138references
