Urinary Catheter Guidelines •CID 2010:50 (1 March) •625IDSA GUIDELINES
Diagnosis, Prevention, and Treatment of Catheter-
Associated Urinary Tract Infection in Adults:2009 International Clinical Practice Guidelinesfrom the Infectious Diseases Society of America
Thomas M. Hooton,1Suzanne F. Bradley,3Diana D. Cardenas,2Richard Colgan,4Suzanne E. Geerlings,7
James C. Rice,5,aSanjay Saint,3Anthony J. Schaeffer,6Paul A. Tambayh,8Peter Tenke,9and Lindsay E. Nicolle10,11
Departments of1Medicine and2Rehabilitation Medicine, University of Miami, Miami, Florida;3Department of Internal Medicine, Ann Arbor
Veterans Affairs Medical Center and the University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan;4Department of Family and Community Medicine,
University of Maryland, Baltimore;5Department of Medicine, University of Texas, Galveston;6Department of Urology, Northwestern University,
Chicago, Illinois;7Department of Infectious Diseases, Tropical Medicine, and AIDS, University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The Netherlands;
8Department of Medicine, National University of Singapore, Singapore;9Department of Urology, Jahn Ference Del-Pesti Korhaz, Budapest,
Hungary; and Departments of10Internal Medicine and11Medical Microbiology, University of Manitoba, Winnipeg, Canada
Guidelines for the diagnosis, prevention, and management of persons with catheter-associated urinary tract
infection (CA-UTI), both symptomatic and asymptomatic, were prepared by an Expert Panel of the InfectiousDiseases Society of America. The evidence-based guidelines encompass diagnostic criteria, strategies to reducethe risk of CA-UTIs, strategies that have not been found to reduce the incidence of urinary infections, andmanagement strategies for patients with catheter-associated asymptomatic bacteriuria or symptomatic urinarytract infection. These guidelines are intended for use by physicians in all medical specialties who performdirect patient care, with an emphasis on the care of patients in hospitals and long-term care facilities.
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
Catheter-associated (CA) bacteriuria is the most com-
mon health care–associated infection worldwide and isa result of the widespread use of urinary catheterization,much of which is inappropriate, in hospitals and long-term care facilities (LTCFs). Considerable personneltime and other costs are expended by health care in-stitutions to reduce the rate of CA infections, especiallythose that occur in patients with symptoms or signsreferable to the urinary tract (CA urinary tract infection[CA-UTI]). In these guidelines, we provide background
Received 23 November 2009; accepted 24 November 2009; electronically
published 4 February 2010.
aPresent afﬁliation: Department of Molecular and Experimental Medicine, The
Scripps Research Institute, La Jolla, California.
Reprints or correspondence: Dr Thomas M. Hooton, 1120 NW 14th St, Ste
1144, Clinical Research Bldg, University of Miami Miller School of Medicine,
Miami, FL 33136 (thooton@med.miami.edu).
Clinical Infectious Diseases 2010; 50:625–663
/H170502010 by the Infectious Diseases Society of America. All rights reserved.
1058-4838/2010/5005-0001$15.00DOI: 10.1086/650482information on the epidemiology and pathogenesis of
CA infections and evidence-based recommendationsfor their diagnosis, prevention and management. Un-fortunately, the catheter literature generally reports onCA asymptomatic bacteriuria (CA-ASB) or CA bacte-riuria (used when no distinction is made between CA-ASB and CA-UTI; such cases are predominantly CA-ASB), rather than on CA-UTI. As a result, mostrecommendations in these guidelines refer to CA-bac-teriuria, because this is the only or predominant out-
These guidelines were developed by the Infectious Diseases Society of America
in collaboration with the American Geriatrics Society, American Society of
Nephrology, American Spinal Injury Association, American Urological Association,Association of Medical Microbiology and Infectious Diseases–Canada, EuropeanAssociation of Urology , European Society of Clinical Microbiology and InfectiousDiseases, Society for Healthcare Epidemiology of America, Society of HospitalMedicine, and the Western Paciﬁc Society of Chemotherapy.
It is important to realize that guidelines cannot always account for individual
variation among patients. They are not intended to supplant physician judgmentwith respect to particular patients or special clinical situations. The IDSA considersadherence to these guidelines to be voluntary, with the ultimate determinationregarding their application to be made by the physician in the light of each patient’sindividual circumstances.Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article/50/5/625/324341 by MUSC Library user on 12 November 2025

626 •CID 2010:50 (1 March) •Hooton et alcome measure reported in most clinical trials. We refer to CA-
ASB and CA-UTI as appropriate on the basis of the publishedliterature.
The most effective way to reduce the incidence of CA-ASB
and CA-UTI is to reduce the use of urinary catheterization byrestricting its use to patients who have clear indications andby removing the catheter as soon as it is no longer needed.Strategies to reduce the use of catheterization have been shownto be effective and are likely to have more impact on the in-cidence of CA-ASB and CA-UTI than any of the other strategiesaddressed in these guidelines. Implementing such strategiesshould be a priority for all health care facilities.
Method of Diagnosing CA-ASB and CA-UTI
1. CA-UTI in patients with indwelling urethral, indwelling
suprapubic, or intermittent catheterization is deﬁned by thepresence of symptoms or signs compatible with UTI with noother identiﬁed source of infection along with /H1109110
3colony-
forming units (cfu)/mL of /H110911 bacterial species in a single cath-
eter urine specimen or in a midstream voided urine specimenfrom a patient whose urethral, suprapubic, or condom catheterhas been removed within the previous 48 h (A-III).
i. Data are insufﬁcient to recommend a speciﬁc quantitative
count for deﬁning CA-UTI in symptomatic men when speci-mens are collected by condom catheter.
2. CA-ASB should not be screened for except in research
studies evaluating interventions designed to reduce the inci-dence of CA-ASB or CA-UTI (A-III) and in selected clinicalsituations, such as in pregnant women (A-III).
i. CA-ASB in patients with indwelling urethral, indwelling
suprapubic, or intermittent catheterization is deﬁned by thepresence of /H1109110
5cfu/mL of /H110911 bacterial species in a single
catheter urine specimen in a patient without symptoms com-patible with UTI (A-III).
ii. CA-ASB in a man with a condom catheter is deﬁned by
the presence of /H1109110
5cfu/mL of /H110911 bacterial species in a single
urine specimen from a freshly applied condom catheter in apatient without symptoms compatible with UTI (A-II).
3. Signs and symptoms compatible with CA-UTI include
new onset or worsening of fever, rigors, altered mental status,malaise, or lethargy with no other identiﬁed cause; ﬂank pain;costovertebral angle tenderness; acute hematuria; pelvic dis-comfort; and in those whose catheters have been removed,dysuria, urgent or frequent urination, or suprapubic pain ortenderness (A-III).
i. In patients with spinal cord injury, increased spasticity,
autonomic dysreﬂexia, or sense of unease are also compatiblewith CA-UTI (A-III).4. In the catheterized patient, pyuria is not diagnostic of
CA-bacteriuria or CA-UTI (AII).
i. The presence, absence, or degree of pyuria should not
be used to differentiate CA-ASB from CA-UTI (A-II).
ii. Pyuria accompanying CA-ASB should not be interpreted
as an indication for antimicrobial treatment (A-II).
iii. The absence of pyuria in a symptomatic patient suggests
a diagnosis other than CA-UTI (A-III).
5. In the catheterized patient, the presence or absence of
odorous or cloudy urine alone should not be used to differ-entiate CA-ASB from CA-UTI or as an indication for urineculture or antimicrobial therapy (A-III).
Reduction of Inappropriate Urinary Catheter Insertion
and Duration
Limiting Unnecessary Catheterization
6. Indwelling catheters should be placed only when they are
indicated (A-III).
i. Indwelling urinary catheters should not be used for the
management of urinary incontinence (A-III). In exceptional
cases, when all other approaches to management of inconti-nence have not been effective, it may be considered at patientrequest.
7. Institutions should develop a list of appropriate indica-
tions for inserting indwelling urinary catheters, educate staffabout such indications, and periodically assess adherence to theinstitution-speciﬁc guidelines (A-III).
8. Institutions should require a physician’s order in the chart
before an indwelling catheter is placed (A-III).
9. Institutions should consider use of portable bladder scan-
ners to determine whether catheterization is necessary for post-operative patients (B-II).
Discontinuation of Catheter
10. Indwelling catheters should be removed as soon as they
are no longer required to reduce the risk of CA-bacteriuria (A-
I) and CA-UTI (A-II).
11. Institutions should consider nurse-based or electronic
physician reminder systems to reduce inappropriate urinarycatheterization (A-II) and CA-UTI (A-II).
12. Institutions should consider automatic stop-orders to
reduce inappropriate urinary catheterization (B-I).
Strategies to Consider Prior to Catheter Insertion
Infection Prevention
13. Hospitals and LTCFs should develop, maintain, and pro-
mulgate policies and procedures for recommended catheter in-sertion indications, insertion and maintenance techniques, dis-continuation strategies, and replacement indications (A-III).Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article/50/5/625/324341 by MUSC Library user on 12 November 2025

Urinary Catheter Guidelines •CID 2010:50 (1 March) •627i. Strategies should include education and training of staff
relevant to these policies and procedures (A-III).
14. Institutions may consider feedback of CA-bacteriuria
rates to nurses and physicians on a regular basis to reduce the
risk of CA-bacteriuria (C-II).
i. Data are insufﬁcient to make a recommendation as to
whether such an intervention might reduce the risk of CA-UTI.
15. Data are insufﬁcient to make a recommendation as to
whether institutions should place patients with indwelling uri-nary catheters in different rooms from other patients who haveindwelling urinary catheters or other invasive devices to reducethe risk of CA-bacteriuria or CA-UTI.
Alternatives to Indwelling Urethral Catheterization
16. In men for whom a urinary catheter is indicated and
who have minimal postvoid residual urine, condom catheter-
ization should be considered as an alternative to short-term(A-II) and long-term (B-II) indwelling catheterization to reduceCA-bacteriuria in those who are not cognitively impaired.
i. Data are insufﬁcient to make a recommendation as to
whether condom catheterization is preferable to short-term orlong-term indwelling urethral catheterization for reduction ofCA-UTI.
ii. Data are insufﬁcient to make a recommendation as to
whether condom catheterization is preferable to short-term orlong-term indwelling urethral catheterization for reduction ofCA-bacteriuria in those who are cognitively impaired.
17. Intermittent catheterization should be considered as an
alternative to short-term (C-I) or long-term (A-III) indwellingurethral catheterization to reduce CA-bacteriuria and an alter-native to short-term (C-III) or long-term (A-III) indwellingurethral catheterization to reduce CA-UTI.
18. Suprapubic catheterization may be considered as an al-
ternative to short-term indwelling urethral catheterization toreduce CA-bacteriuria (B-I) and CA-UTI (C-III).
i. Data are insufﬁcient to make a recommendation as to
whether suprapubic catheterization is preferable to long-termindwelling urethral catheterization for reduction of CA-bac-teriuria or CA-UTI.
ii. Data are insufﬁcient to make a recommendation as to
whether intermittent catheterization is preferable to suprapubiccatheterization for reduction of CA-bacteriuria or CA-UTI.
Intermittent Catheterization Technique
19. Clean (nonsterile) rather than sterile technique may be
considered in outpatient (A-III) and institutional (B-I) settings
with no difference in risk of CA-bacteriuria or CA-UTI.20. Multiple-use catheters may be considered instead of ster-
ile single-use catheters in outpatient (B-III) and institutional(C-I) settings with no difference in risk of CA-bacteriuria orCA-UTI.
21. Data are insufﬁcient to make a recommendation as to
whether one method of cleaning multiple-use catheters is su-perior to another.
22. Hydrophilic catheters are not recommended for routine
use to reduce the risk of CA-bacteriuria (B-II) or CA-UTI (B-II).
23. Data are insufﬁcient to make recommendations on
whether use of portable bladder scanners or “no-touch” tech-nique reduces the risk of CA-UTI, compared with standardcare.
Insertion Technique for Indwelling Urethral Catheter
24. Indwelling urethral catheters should be inserted using
aseptic technique and sterile equipment (B-III).
Prevention Strategies to Consider after Catheter Insertion
Closed Catheter System
25. A closed catheter drainage system, with ports in the distal
catheter for needle aspiration of urine, should be used to reduce
CA-bacteriuria (A-II) and CA-UTI (A-III) in patients withshort-term indwelling urethral or suprapubic catheters and toreduce CA-bacteriuria (A-III) and CA-UTI (A-III) in patientswith long-term indwelling urethral or suprapubic catheters.
i. Institution-speciﬁc strategies should be developed to en-
sure that disconnection of the catheter junction is minimized(A-III) and that the drainage bag and connecting tube are al-ways kept below the level of the bladder (A-III).
26. Use of a preconnected system (catheter preattached to
the tubing of a closed drainage bag) may be considered toreduce CA-bacteriuria (C-II).
i. Data are insufﬁcient to make a recommendation as to
whether such a system reduces CA-UTI.
27. Use of a complex closed drainage system or application
of tape at the catheter-drainage tubing junction after catheterinsertion is not recommended to reduce CA-bacteriuria (A-I)or CA-UTI (A-III).
Antimicrobial Coated Catheters
28. In patients with short-term indwelling urethral cathe-
terization, antimicrobial (silver alloy or antibiotic)–coated uri-
nary catheters may be considered to reduce or delay the onset
of CA-bacteriuria (B-II).
i. Data are insufﬁcient to make a recommendation about
whether use of such catheters reduces CA-UTI in patients withshort-term indwelling urethral catheterization.Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article/50/5/625/324341 by MUSC Library user on 12 November 2025

628 •CID 2010:50 (1 March) •Hooton et alii. Data are insufﬁcient to make a recommendation as to
whether use of such catheters reduces CA-bacteriuria or CA-
UTI in patients with long-term catheterization.
Prophylaxis with Systemic Antimicrobials
29. Systemic antimicrobial prophylaxis should not be rou-
tinely used in patients with short-term (A-III) or long-term
(A-II) catheterization, including patients who undergo surgicalprocedures, to reduce CA-bacteriuria or CA-UTI because ofconcern about selection of antimicrobial resistance.
Prophylaxis with Methenamine Salts
30. Methenamine salts should not be used routinely to re-
duce CA-bacteriuria or CA-UTI in patients with long-term
intermittent (A-II) or long-term indwelling urethral or supra-pubic (A-III) catheterization.
i. Data are insufﬁcient to make a recommendation about
the use of methenamine salts to reduce CA-UTI in patientswith condom catheterization.
31. Methenamine salts may be considered for the reduction
of CA-bacteriuria and CA-UTI in patients after gynecologicsurgery who are catheterized for no more than 1 week (C-I).It is reasonable to assume that a similar effect would be seenafter other types of surgical procedures.
i. Data are insufﬁcient to make recommendations about
whether one methenamine salt is superior to another.
32. When using a methenamine salt to reduce CA-UTI, the
urinary pH should be maintained below 6.0 (B-III).
i. Data are insufﬁcient to recommend how best to achieve
a low urinary pH.
Prophylaxis with Cranberry Products
33. Cranberry products should not be used routinely to re-
duce CA-bacteriuria or CA-UTI in patients with neurogenic
bladders managed with intermittent or indwelling catheteri-zation (A-II).
i. Data are insufﬁcient to make a recommendation on the
use of cranberry products to reduce CA-bacteriuria or CA-UTIin other groups of catheterized patients, including those usingcondom catheters.
Enhanced Meatal Care
34. Daily meatal cleansing with povidone-iodine solution,
silver sulfadiazine, polyantibiotic ointment or cream, or green
soap and water is not recommended for routine use in menor women with indwelling urethral catheters to reduce CA-bacteriuria (A-I).i. Data are insufﬁcient to make a recommendation as to
whether meatal cleansing reduces the risk of CA-UTI.
Catheter Irrigation
35. Catheter irrigation with antimicrobials should not be
used routinely to reduce or eradicate CA-bacteriuria (A-I) or
CA-UTI (A-II) in patients with indwelling catheters.
36. Catheter irrigation with antimicrobials may be consid-
ered in selected patients who undergo surgical procedures andshort-term catheterization to reduce CA-bacteriuria (C-I).
i. Data are insufﬁcient to make a recommendation about
whether bladder irrigation in such patients reduces CA-UTI.
37. Catheter irrigation with normal saline should not be
used routinely to reduce CA-bacteriuria, CA-UTI, or obstruc-tion in patients with long-term indwelling catheterization (B-II).
Antimicrobials in the Drainage Bag
38. Routine addition of antimicrobials or antiseptics to the
drainage bag of catheterized patients should not be used to
reduce CA-bacteriuria (A-I) or CA-UTI (A-I).
Routine Catheter Change
39. Data are insufﬁcient to make a recommendation as to
whether routine catheter change (eg, every 2–4 weeks) in pa-
tients with functional long-term indwelling urethral or supra-pubic catheters reduces the risk of CA-ASB or CA-UTI, evenin patients who experience repeated early catheter blockagefrom encrustation.
Prophylactic Antimicrobials at Time of Catheter Removal
or Replacement
40. Prophylactic antimicrobials, given systemically or by
bladder irrigation, should not be administered routinely to pa-tients at the time of catheter placement to reduce CA-UTI (A-
I) or at the time of catheter removal (B-I) or replacement (A-
III) to reduce CA-bacteriuria.
i. Data are insufﬁcient to make a recommendation as to
whether administration of prophylactic antimicrobials to suchpatients reduces bacteremia.
Screening for and Treatment of CA-ASB in Catheterized
Patients to Reduce CA-UTI
41. Screening for and treatment of CA-ASB are not rec-
ommended to reduce subsequent CA-bacteriuria or CA-UTIin patients with short-term (A-II) or long-term (A-I) indwellingurethral catheters.
42. Screening for and treatment of CA-ASB are not rec-
ommended to reduce subsequent CA-bacteriuria or CA-UTIDownloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article/50/5/625/324341 by MUSC Library user on 12 November 2025

Urinary Catheter Guidelines •CID 2010:50 (1 March) •629in patients with neurogenic bladders managed with intermittent
catheterization (A-II).
43. Screening for and treatment of CA-ASB are not rec-
ommended to reduce subsequent CA-bacteriuria or CA-UTIin other catheterized patients (A-III), except in pregnantwomen (A-III) and patients who undergo urologic proceduresfor which visible mucosal bleeding is anticipated (A-III).
Screening for and Treatment of CA-ASB at Catheter Removal
to Reduce CA-UTI
44. Antimicrobial treatment of CA-ASB that persists 48 h
after short-term indwelling catheter removal in women may beconsidered to reduce the risk of subsequent CA-UTI (C-I).
i. Data are insufﬁcient, however, to make a recommen-
dation as to whether all women should be uniformly screenedfor CA-ASB at catheter removal.
ii. Data are insufﬁcient to make a recommendation about
screening for or treatment of persistent CA-ASB in men.
Urine Culture and Catheter Replacement before Treatment
45. A urine specimen for culture should be obtained prior
to initiating antimicrobial therapy for presumed CA-UTI be-
cause of the wide spectrum of potential infecting organismsand the increased likelihood of antimicrobial resistance (A-III).
46. If an indwelling catheter has been in place for
12 weeks
at the onset of CA-UTI and is still indicated, the catheter shouldbe replaced to hasten resolution of symptoms and to reducethe risk of subsequent CA-bacteriuria and CA-UTI (A-I).
i. The urine culture should be obtained from the freshly
placed catheter prior to the initiation of antimicrobial therapyto help guide treatment (A-II).
ii. If use of the catheter can be discontinued, a culture of
a voided midstream urine specimen should be obtained priorto the initiation of antimicrobial therapy to help guide treat-
ment (A-III).
Duration of Treatment
47. Seven days is the recommended duration of antimicro-
bial treatment for patients with CA-UTI who have prompt
resolution of symptoms (A-III), and 10–14 days of treatmentis recommended for those with a delayed response (A-III),regardless of whether the patient remains catheterized or not.
i. A 5-day regimen of levoﬂoxacin may be considered in
patients with CA-UTI who are not severely ill (B-III). Data areinsufﬁcient to make such a recommendation about other ﬂu-oroquinolones.
ii. A 3-day antimicrobial regimen may be considered for
women aged /H1108865 years who develop CA-UTI without upper
urinary tract symptoms after an indwelling catheter has beenremoved (B-II).DEFINITIONS
In these guidelines, CA infection refers to infection occurring
in a person whose urinary tract is currently catheterized or has
been catheterized within the previous 48 h. UTI refers to sig-
niﬁcant bacteriuria in a patient with symptoms or signs at-
tributable to the urinary tract and no alternate source. ASBrefers to signiﬁcant bacteriuria in a patient without symptoms
or signs attributable to the urinary tract. Bacteriuria is a non-
speciﬁc term that refers to UTI and ASB combined. In the
urinary catheter literature, CA-bacteriuria is comprised mostly
of CA-ASB. In this document, CA-UTI, CA-ASB, and CA-
bacteriuria are each considered to represent infection of theurinary tract, because bacteria are not normal inhabitants of
the urinary tract.
Signiﬁcant bacteriuria is the quantitative level of bacteriuria
consistent with true bladder bacteriuria, rather than contam-
ination, based on growth from a urine specimen collected in
a manner to minimize contamination and transported to the
laboratory in a timely fashion to limit bacterial growth. As
noted above, signiﬁcant bacteriuria can occur without symp-toms or signs referable to the urinary tract. The colony count
criteria deﬁning signiﬁcant bacteriuria in different clinical sce-
narios as recommended for use by the Guideline Panel are
described in the section below on diagnosis. Lower colony
counts are more likely to represent signiﬁcant bacteriuria in asymptomatic person, compared with an asymptomatic person.Likewise, because catheter urine specimens are not as likely to
be contaminated by periurethral ﬂora as are voided urine spec-
imens, lower colony counts are more likely to represent sig-niﬁcant bacteriuria. Unfortunately, studies often use different
colony count criteria for deﬁning signiﬁcant bacteriuria and
often do not distinguish between symptomatic and asymptom-
atic patients in applying the deﬁnitions.
The urinary catheter literature is problematic, in that many
published studies use the term CA-bacteriuria without provid-ing information on what proportion of infections are CA-ASB,
and some studies use the term CA-UTI when referring to CA-
ASB or CA-bacteriuria. The recommendations that follow refer
to the more speciﬁc terms, CA-UTI and/or CA-ASB, when dataon these outcomes are reported in clinical studies, but mostrecommendations refer to CA-bacteriuria, because this is the
only or predominant outcome measure reported in most clin-
ical trials. It is our hope that the deﬁnitions used in these
guidelines might help to standardize the terminology used inthe catheter literature and related discussions.
INTRODUCTION
The purpose of these guidelines is to provide recommendations
for the diagnosis, prevention, and treatment of CA-UTI inadults/H1109118 years of age. The guidelines pertain to patients whoDownloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article/50/5/625/324341 by MUSC Library user on 12 November 2025

630 •CID 2010:50 (1 March) •Hooton et alare managed with indwelling catheterization, including short-
term ( !30 days) and long-term (/H11091 30 days) catheterization,
intermittent catheterization, and condom catheterization. Is-sues relevant to persons with neurogenic bladders are addressed.
The guidelines do not address patients with single in-and-out
catheterization for diagnostic purposes; patients who undergo
complicated urologic catheterization procedures, such as thoseinvolving ureteral stents or nephrostomy tubes; or patients with
fungal UTI. Recommendations for the management of fungal
UTI are provided in the Infectious Disease Society of America’s
(IDSA) treatment guidelines for candidiasis [1]. In using theseguidelines, it should be noted that CA-ASB and CA-UTI occur
in a very heterogeneous group of patients, ranging from healthy
persons catheterized for a surgical procedure to patients with
neurogenic bladders to severely ill patients catheterized to re-lieve an obstructed outﬂow tract. The currently available lit-
erature provides little data on the effect of different prevention
and treatment strategies among different types of catheterized
patients. Studies to address prevention and treatment strategies
in speciﬁc groupings of catheterized patients are needed.
Most hospital-acquired UTIs are associated with catheteri-
zation, and most occur in patients without signs or symptoms
referable to the urinary tract. CA-bacteriuria is the most fre-
quent health care–associated infection worldwide, accounting
for up to 40% of hospital-acquired infections in US hospitals
each year [2, 3]. In hospitalized patients, CA-bacteriuria ac-
counts for many episodes of nosocomial bacteremia, and one
study has found an association with increased mortality [4].
From 5% to 10% of residents in LTCFs have long-term in-
dwelling urinary catheters with associated bacteriuria [5, 6]. In
addition, CA-bacteriuria results in considerable antimicrobial
use (often inappropriate) in hospitals and LTCFs and comprises
a large reservoir of antimicrobial-resistant organisms that con-
tribute to the problem of cross-infection.
CA-bacteriuria has important implications for the pa-
tient and others in the environment and should be a high pri-
ority for infection prevention programs. Not surprisingly, the
most effective way to reduce the risk of CA-bacteriuria is to
avoid unnecessary catheterization and to remove the catheter
promptly when it is no longer needed. However, despite the
strong link between urinary catheterization and subsequentUTI, US hospitals have not widely implemented strategies toreduce hospital-acquired UTI [7]. This may change in the
United States with the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Ser-
vices recent modiﬁcation of the hospital reimbursement system
to eliminate payments to hospitals for treatment of preventablecomplications, such as CA-UTI [8]. It is not possible, however,to prevent all CA-UTIs, especially in patients who need long-term bladder drainage, such as those with neurogenic bladders.
Because the relationship between CA-ASB and CA-UTI and
other outcomes is unclear, it is challenging to assess an inter-vention that has been shown to reduce CA-ASB (or CA-bac-
teriuria) but that has an unknown effect on CA-UTI. Althoughthe presence of CA-ASB is presumably necessary for the de-velopment of CA-UTI, the vast majority of patients with CA-ASB do not progress to CA-UTI. Thus, the development ofurinary symptoms must require some facilitating event(s) thatis yet to be determined. Even if CA-ASB itself is benign, thereare several reasons that may justify efforts for prevention. Forexample, CA-ASB may predispose a patient to CA-UTI througha common pathogenic pathway, in which case interventionsthat reduce CA-ASB would be expected to reduce CA-UTI. Inaddition, CA-ASB represents a large reservoir of antimicrobial-resistant urinary pathogens that may be transmitted to otherpatients and frequently triggers inappropriate antimicrobial use.Therefore, the greatest impact of an intervention may be toreduce the frequent occurrence of CA-ASB, rather than to di-rectly reduce the number of episodes of CA-UTI, which occurmuch less often. The majority of intervention trials that havebeen shown to reduce CA-ASB or CA-bacteriuria have notdemonstrated effectiveness to reduce CA-UTI, but few trialshave been designed and powered to evaluate such outcomes.
The focus of these guidelines is the prevention and man-
agement of CA-UTI. The Panel addressed the following clinicalquestions in these guidelines: “How should CA-UTI be diag-nosed?,” “How should CA-UTI be prevented?,” and “Howshould CA-UTI be managed?” However, when data were avail-able, the Panel agreed to also provide a ranking with supportinglevel of evidence for recommendations for or against interven-tions shown to impact CA-ASB or CA-bacteriuria. This rec-ommendation schema allows users of these guidelines to decidewhether to implement an intervention on the basis of evidencethat it reduces CA-ASB or CA-bacteriuria with or without evi-dence of its effect on CA-UTI. Ideally, formal evaluations thatincorporate clinical and economic consequences of interven-tions will help decision-makers decide whether interventionsthat reduce only CA-ASB or CA-bacteriuria or interventionsthat reduce CA-UTI should be adopted. Unfortunately, sucheconomic evaluations are rarely available.
PRACTICE GUIDELINES AND METHODOLOGY
“Practice guidelines are systematically developed statements to
assist practitioners and patients in making decisions about ap-
propriate health care for speciﬁc clinical circumstances” [9, p.
8]. Attributes of high-quality guidelines include validity, reli-ability, reproducibility, clinical applicability, clinical ﬂexibility,clarity, multidisciplinary process, review of evidence, and doc-umentation [9].
Panel composition. The IDSA Standards and Practice
Guidelines Committee (SPGC) convened a multidisciplinary
panel of experts in the management of CA-UTI. Panel partic-ipants included representatives from the following collaboratingDownloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article/50/5/625/324341 by MUSC Library user on 12 November 2025

Urinary Catheter Guidelines •CID 2010:50 (1 March) •631Table 1. Strength of Recommendation and Quality of Evidence
Category/grade Deﬁnition
Strength of recommendation
A Good evidence to support a recommendation for or against use.
B Moderate evidence to support a recommendation for or against use.
C Poor evidence to support a recommendation for or against use.
Quality of evidence
I Evidence from 11 properly randomized, controlled trial.
II Evidence from 11 well-designed clinical trial, without randomization; from cohort or case-controlled ana-
lytic studies (preferably from 11 center); from multiple time-series; or from dramatic results from un-
controlled experiments.
III Evidence from opinions of respected authorities, based on clinical experience, descriptive studies, or
reports of expert committees.
NOTE. Adapted from the Canadian Task Force on the Periodic Health Examination [10]. Adapted and reproduced with the permission of the Minister of
Public Works and Government Services Canada, 2009. Any combination of strength of recommendation and quality of evidence is possible. See Practice
Guidelines and Methodology for further discussion.organizations: American Geriatrics Society, American Society
of Nephrology, American Spinal Injury Association, AmericanUrological Association, Association of Medical Microbiologyand Infectious Diseases–Canada, European Association of Urol-ogy, European Society of Clinical Microbiology and InfectiousDiseases, Society for Healthcare Epidemiology of America, So-ciety of Hospital Medicine, and the Western Paciﬁc Society ofChemotherapy.
Literature review and analysis. The recommendations in
these guidelines have been developed after a review of studiespublished in English, although foreign language articles wereincluded in some of the Cochrane reviews summarized in theseguidelines. Studies were identiﬁed through a PubMed searchwith no date restrictions using subject headings “urinary” com-bined with the keyword “catheter,” other keywords such as“nosocomial,” “neurogenic bladder,” “intermittent,” “supra-pubic,” and “methenamine,” supplemented by review of ref-erences of relevant articles to identify additional reports, par-ticularly early studies not accessed through the PubMed search.In addition, experts in urinary infection were asked to identifyany additional trials not accessed through the review. Clinicalstudies include prospective randomized clinical trials, prospec-tive cohort studies, case-control studies, and other descriptivestudies. Studies were excluded if the study population, inter-vention, or study design were not clearly described; if proce-dures for patient follow-up or exclusions may have introducedsufﬁcient bias to limit the credibility of observations; or if therewere insufﬁcient patients enrolled to support valid statisticalanalysis. Conclusions from meta-analyses, such as Cochranereviews, were included.
Process overview. T o evaluate evidence, the Panel followed
a process consistent with that of other IDSA guidelines. Thisprocess included a systematic weighting of the quality of theevidence and the grade of recommendation (Table 1) [10].Initial ﬁndings were discussed by the Panel, and ﬁnal recom-mendations were determined by consensus. Each Panel memberwas assigned 1 or more proposed sections of the guidelines, sothat each such section was assigned to 2 or more Panel mem-bers, and each Panel member was asked to review the literaturefor that section and to critique the strength of the recommen-dation and quality of evidence for each recommendation thathad been proposed by 1 or more other Panel members for thatsection. The full Panel was then asked to review all recom-mendations, their strength, and the quality of evidence. Dis-crepancies were discussed and resolved, and all Panel membersare in agreement with the ﬁnal recommendations.
Any combination of Strength of Recommendation and Qual-
ity of Evidence is possible. For example, a recommendationcan have Strength A even if it is based entirely on expert opinionand no research studies have ever been conducted on the rec-ommendation (Quality of Evidence III). Similarly, a StrengthB or C can be assigned a Quality of Evidence I if there aremultiple randomized, controlled trials that arrive at divergentconclusions. Assigning a Quality of Evidence II or III shouldnot be construed as implying that the recommendation is weak.Many important clinical questions addressed in guidelines ei-ther do not lend themselves to experimentation or have notyet been addressed by high-quality investigations. Even thoughrandomized, controlled trials may not be available, the clinicalquestion may be so relevant that it would be delinquent to notinclude it in the guidelines. Often the Quality of Evidence willparallel the Strength of Recommendation, but this is not nec-essarily the case.
Consensus development on the basis of evidence. The
Panel met on 2 occasions for face-to-face meetings and on 3occasions via teleconference to complete the work of the guide-lines. The purpose of the teleconferences was to discuss thequestions to be addressed, assign topics for review and writingof the initial draft, and discuss recommendations. Much of thework was done with e-mail correspondence. All members ofDownloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article/50/5/625/324341 by MUSC Library user on 12 November 2025

632 •CID 2010:50 (1 March) •Hooton et althe Panel participated in the preparation and review of the
draft guidelines. Feedback from external peer reviewers was alsoobtained. The guidelines were reviewed and approved by theIDSA SPGC and Board of Directors and all collaborating or-ganizations prior to dissemination.
Guidelines and conﬂict of interest. All members of the
Expert Panel complied with the IDSA policy on conﬂicts ofinterest, which requires disclosure of any ﬁnancial or otherinterest that might be construed as constituting an actual, po-tential, or apparent conﬂict. Members of the Expert Panel wereprovided IDSA’s conﬂict of interest disclosure statement andwere asked to identify ties to companies developing productsthat might be affected by promulgation of the guidelines. In-formation was requested regarding employment, consultancies,stock ownership, honoraria, research funding, expert testimony,and membership on company advisory committees. The Panelmade decisions on a case-by-case basis as to whether an in-dividual’s role should be limited as a result of a conﬂict. Po-tential conﬂicts are listed in the Acknowledgements section.
Revision dates. At annual intervals, the Panel Chair, the
SPGC liaison advisor, and the Chair of the SPGC will determinethe need for revisions to the guidelines on the basis of anexamination of current literature. If necessary, the entire Panelwill be reconvened to discuss potential changes. When appro-priate, the Panel will recommend revision of the guidelines tothe SPGC and IDSA Board and other collaborating organiza-tions for review and approval.
BACKGROUND
Epidemiology. CA-bacteriuria is the most common health
care–associated infection worldwide [11]. It accounts for up to
40% of hospital-acquired infections and most of the 900,000patients with nosocomial bacteriuria in US hospitals each year[2, 3, 12, 13]. From 15% to 25% of patients in general hospitalshave a urethral catheter inserted at some time during their stay[3, 14], and the rate of catheter use appears to be increasing[15]. Most hospitalized patients are catheterized for only 2–4days [16], but many are catheterized for longer durations.
CA-bacteriuria is also among the most common infections
in LTCFs [5, 6], although symptomatic UTI is less commonthan are respiratory and skin and soft-tissue infections [5, 6].
From 5% to 10% of nursing home residents are managed with
urethral catheterization, in some cases for years [6, 17, 18]. It
is estimated that
1100,000 patients in US LTCFs have a urethral
catheter in place at any given time [6, 16, 17, 19]. Almost allof those residents with long-term indwelling catheters are bac-teriuric [20]. In one study involving a Veterans Affairs hospitaland nursing home population, the majority of patients whowere managed with intermittent catheterization were also bac-teriuric [21].
More than 250,000 people in the United States are estimatedto be living with spinal cord injury as a result of trauma, andeach year ∼12,000 new injuries occur [22]. Modern manage-
ment of the bladder in spinal cord injury has successfully re-duced renal-related mortality among individuals with spinal
cord injury from 95% in the ﬁrst half of the 20th century to
3% at present [23]. CA-bacteriuria and CA-UTI rates in pa-
tients with spinal cord injury vary according to what infectiondeﬁnitions are used and according to the method of bladder
drainage (indwelling catheterization is associated with the high-
est rates of infection) [24]. In a prospective, 38-month obser-
vational study involving 128 acutely injured patients at an spinal
cord injury referral hospital, the overall incidence was 2.72 cases
and 0.68 cases per 100 person-days for CA- bacteriuria and
CA-UTI, respectively [25].
The incidence of bacteriuria associated with indwelling cath-
eterization is 3%–8% per day [14, 26–29], and the duration of
catheterization is the most important risk factor for the de-
velopment of CA-bacteriuria [30, 31]. Thus, rates will vary in
published studies according to how long the patients have been
catheterized and how often urine cultures are performed. By 1
month, nearly all patients with an indwelling catheter will bebacteriuric. Other risk factors associated with CA-bacteriuria
include not receiving systemic antimicrobial therapy, female
sex, positive urethral meatal culture results, microbial coloni-
zation of the drainage bag, catheter insertion outside the op-
erating room, catheter care violations, rapidly fatal underlying
illness, older age, diabetes mellitus, and elevated serum creat-
inine at the time of catheterization [14, 31–36]. In a question-
naire and microbiologic study involving patients with clean
intermittent catheterization, CA-UTI was associated with less
frequent catheterization [37].
Complications of short-term catheterization. Less than
one-quarter of hospitalized patients with CA-bacteriuria de-
velop UTI symptoms [27, 38–40]. In one study of 235 new
cases of nosocomial CA-bacteriuria,
190% of the infected pa-
tients were asymptomatic and afebrile, and moreover, the oc-
currence of symptoms and signs suggestive of UTI, such asdysuria, fever, or leukocytosis, was similar for patients with and
patients without CA-bacteriuria [40]. Likewise, in a retrospec-
tive cohort study describing 510 consecutive patients with
trauma, neither fever nor leukocytosis was associated with CA-bacteriuria [41]. The authors concluded that there was an un-necessary emphasis on UTI as a source of fever and leukocytosis
in patients hospitalized in the intensive care unit (ICU).
Approximately 15% of cases of nosocomial bacteremia are
attributable to the urinary tract [42], and bacteriuria is the
most common source of gram-negative bacteremia among hos-pitalized patients [43]. However, bacteremia complicates CA-bacteriuria in only
!1% [40] to 4% of cases [42, 44]. UTIs in
the ICU account for a smaller proportion of bacteremias [45].The mortality rate among patients with nosocomial bacteremicDownloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article/50/5/625/324341 by MUSC Library user on 12 November 2025

Urinary Catheter Guidelines •CID 2010:50 (1 March) •633UTI is ∼13%, but !1% of hospital deaths are due to bacteremic
UTI [42].
The effect of CA-bacteriuria on mortality remains contro-
versial. Platt et al [4] reported in a prospective study involving
1458 hospitalized patients with indwelling bladder catheteri-
zations that death rates were 19% among patients with CA-
bacteriuria, compared with 4% among those without, with anadjusted odds ratio for mortality between those who acquired
CA-bacteriuria and those who did not of 2.8 (95% conﬁdence
interval [CI], 1.5–5.1). These authors presented more evidence
for causality in a randomized trial evaluating sealed urinary
catheter junctions, in which it was found that the degree of
reduction in CA-bacteriuria with use of the sealed catheters
corresponded closely with the degree of mortality reduction
[46]. The mechanism accounting for an increased mortalityamong catheterized patients would presumably be secondarybacteremia and septicemia [47], but this is only speculative.
Other investigators, in studies of mostly patients hospitalized
in the ICU, have not shown an increased mortality risk asso-
ciated with CA-bacteriuria [48–52]. The association with mor-
tality is likely explained by confounding, because catheterizedpatients tend to be sicker and more functionally impaired [52].
Studies performed almost 3 decades ago demonstrated that
patients who develop CA-bacteriuria have their hospital stays
extended by 2–4 days [53, 54]. Haley et al [55] estimated that
the attributable additional length of stay was somewhat shorter,
ranging from 0.4 days for CA-ASB to 2.0 days for CA-UTI. In
recent studies conducted in the era of managed care, each ep-
isode of CA-ASB and CA-UTI has been estimated to cost an
additional $589 and $676, respectively, and bacteremia asso-
ciated with CA-bacteriuria is estimated to cost at least $2836[38, 56]. Although the costs associated with individual episodes
of bacteriuria are modest, the high frequency of catheter use
means that these infections may add as much as $500 million
to health care costs in the United States each year [57]. How-
ever, episodes of CA-ASB that are not detected by surveillancecultures do not add to hospital costs [56], and thus, these costs,which are based on surveillance cultures that are not routinely
recommended or performed, may well be overestimated.
CA-ASB comprises a large reservoir of antimicrobial-resis-
tant organisms, particularly on critical care units, and can be
the source of cross-infection [31, 58–63]. One study reportedthat 15% of episodes of hospital-acquired bacteriuria occur in
clusters [58], and these often involve highly antimicrobial-re-
sistant organisms. Genetic typing of uropathogens isolated from
urine samples of 144 catheterized patients with CA-bacteriuriarevealed a high rate of clonal relationship among uropathogensin a single urological ward [63]. In addition, CA-ASB is aubiquitous infection and a tempting target for physicians whohave a low threshold for using antimicrobials (inappropriately,in this case). For example, in a recent prospective study in-volving inpatients with an indwelling catheter and CA-ASB, 15
(52%) of 29 patients received inappropriate antimicrobial treat-
ment [64].
Although most catheters are latex-based, an increasing num-
ber of hospitals are using silicone-based catheters because of
the prevalence of latex allergies [65]. Silicone catheters may
have advantages over latex catheters, with in vitro and in vivoobservations suggesting that latex is associated with more cy-
totoxicity, inﬂammation, urethritis, stricture formation, penile
discomfort, and obstruction from encrustations [66]. However,
there are no convincing data that latex catheters are associatedwith a higher risk of CA-bacteriuria.
Complications of long-term catheterization. Patients in
LTCFs are overrepresented among patients with long-term
catheterization. The complications of CA-bacteriuria seen inthe acute care setting presumably also apply to patients with
CA-bacteriuria in LTCFs. In a study involving catheterized and
bacteriuric female nursing home patients, the incidence of feb-
rile episodes of possible urinary origin was 1.1 episodes per
100 catheterized patient-days, and most of these episodes were
low grade, lasted for
!1 day, and resolved without antimicrobial
treatment [28]. However, some episodes, usually associated
with higher temperatures, were associated with bacteremia and
death. Moreover, long-term urinary catheterization is associ-
ated with an increased likelihood of upper urinary tract in-
ﬂammation at autopsy, presumably because of CA-bacteriuria.
A blinded autopsy study of 75 aged nursing home patients
reported that acute inﬂammation of the renal parenchyma was
present in 38% of patients with a urinary catheter in place at
death versus 5% of noncatheterized patients ( ) [67]. Pp.004
In another prospective 2-year autopsy study of residents /H1109165
years of age in a LTCF, the duration of catheterization was
signiﬁcantly associated with chronic pyelonephritis and chron-
ic renal inﬂammation [68]. The prevalence of chronic pyelo-
nephritis at death was 10% (5 of 52 patients) for patients
catheterized for 190 days during their last year of life ver-
sus 0% (0 of 65 patients) for those catheterized for /H1108890
days ( ). P!.02
Bacteriuria is also a common source of bacteremia in LTCFs,
accounting for 45%–55% of bacteremias [69–71], and is often
polymicrobic in patients with long-term catheterization. Al-
though bacteremias in LTCFs are uncommon [69, 72], urinary
catheterization was associated with a 39-fold increase in the
incidence of bacteremia in one study [71]. Transient asymp-tomatic bacteremia occurs in ∼4% of bacteriuric patients with
long-term catheterization whose indwelling urethral or supra-pubic catheter is removed or replaced [73–75].
Increased mortality has also been reported among residents
of LTCFs with long-term indwelling catheters, although the
association with CA-bacteriuria was not evaluated [76]. How-ever, as with hospitalized patients, the association between uri-Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article/50/5/625/324341 by MUSC Library user on 12 November 2025

634 •CID 2010:50 (1 March) •Hooton et alnary catheterization and increased mortality is likely explained
by confounding [52, 77].
Complications of long-term catheterization ( 130 days) in-
clude, in addition to almost universal bacteriuria, lower and
upper CA-UTI, bacteremia, frequent febrile episodes, catheter
obstruction, renal and bladder stone formation associated with
urease-producing uropathogens, local genitourinary infections,ﬁstula formation, incontinence, and bladder cancer [16].
Pathogenesis. The most important predisposing factor for
nosocomial UTI is urinary catheterization, which perturbs host
defense mechanisms and provides easier access of uropathogens
to the bladder. The indwelling urethral catheter introduces an
inoculum of bacteria (fecal or skin bacteria in a patient’s own
native or transitory microﬂora) into the bladder at the time of
insertion [78], facilitates ascension of uropathogens from themeatus to the bladder via the catheter-mucosa interface, allowsfor intraluminal spread of pathogens to the bladder if the col-
lecting tube or drainage bag have become contaminated, com-
promises complete bladder emptying, and provides a frequently
manipulated foreign body on which pathogens are deposited
via the hands of personnel. It also appears that uroepithelialcells from catheterized patients are more receptive to binding
of bacteria just prior to onset of infection [79].
Approximately two-thirds (79% for gram-positive cocci and
54% for gram-negative bacilli) of the uropathogens that cause
CA-bacteriuria in patients with indwelling urethral catheters
are extraluminally acquired (by ascension along the catheter-
urethral mucosa interface), and one-third are intraluminally
acquired [80]. The causative uropathogen can be found in the
urethra in up to 67% of women and 29% of men just prior
to the development of CA-bacteriuria, which suggests that entryof uropathogens via the urethral route occurs more often in
women than it does in men [34, 81], which is a sex difference
that is not seen in other studies [80]. Further support for ex-
traluminal ascension as the most common pathway for bacteria
to gain entry into the bladder comes from a study that showedonly 3 of 29 episodes of bacteriuria with gram-negative bacillior enterococci occurred in patients with negative meatal cul-
tures for these organisms [29]. In addition, patients remain at
increased risk of bacteriuria for at least 24 h even after removal
of the catheter [27], which suggests that colonization of theurethra persists after the catheter is removed. The relative im-portance of the intraluminal pathway is associated with the
frequency with which closed drainage systems are breached,
which is associated with UTI. Both animal and human studies
have demonstrated that bacteria that enter the drainage bag aresoon found in the bladder [14, 27, 82, 83].
Indwelling urinary catheters facilitate colonization with uro-
pathogens by providing a surface for the attachment of hostcell binding receptors recognized by bacterial adhesins, thusenhancing microbial adhesion. In addition, the uroepithelialmucosa is disrupted, exposing new binding sites for bacterial
adhesins, and residual urine in the bladder is increased through
pooling below the catheter bulb [84]. Organisms causing nos-
ocomial UTI require fewer recognized virulence factors to col-
onize and establish infection than do organisms that infect a
normal urinary tract [85–87]. Bacterial adhesins initiate at-
tachment by recognizing host cell receptors located on the sur-faces of the host cell or catheter. Once attached to the catheter
surface, bacteria change phenotypically and produce exopoly-
saccharides that entrap and protect replicating bacteria, forming
microcolonies and, eventually, mature bioﬁlms [84]. Tamm-
Horsfall protein and urinary salts are often incorporated into
the bioﬁlm [47]. Urinary catheters readily develop bioﬁlms on
their inner and outer surfaces after insertion, and these bioﬁlms
migrate to the bladder within 1–3 days [32]. A scanning electronmicroscopy study of 50 urethral catheters indwelling for a meanof 35 days showed 44 catheters with evidence of bioﬁlm for-
mation ranging from 3 through 490 microns in depth with
visible bacterial cells up to 400 cells deep [88].
Bioﬁlms are usually initially caused by single species but
become polymicrobic, especially with long-term catheters.
These organisms are often highly antimicrobial resistant. The
rate of genetic material exchanged among organisms within the
bioﬁlm is greater than that between planktonic cells, which
facilitates the spread of genes for antimicrobial resistance and
other traits [84]. Once established, bioﬁlms inherently protect
uropathogens from antimicrobials and the host immune re-
sponse. The shedding of daughter cells from actively growing
cells seeds other sections of the catheter and bladder. Planktonic
bacteria isolated in urine cultures obtained via a catheter with
a bioﬁlm may not accurately reﬂect the bacterial populationgrowing within the bladder [89–91].
Catheter encrustations can be formed by organisms in bio-
ﬁlms, usually organisms that have the ability to hydrolyze urea
in the urine to free ammonia, resulting in an increased local
pH. These include Proteus species, Pseudomonas aeruginosa ,
Klebsiella pneumoniae , and Providencia species. This alkaline
pH facilitates precipitation of minerals, thereby creating hy-
droxyapatite or struvite and encrustations that can obstruct
catheter urine ﬂow [32]. Patients with repeated blocking of
catheters appear to be metabolically different from other pa-tients, because they excrete more alkaline urine, calcium, pro-tein, and mucin [92]. Patients with blocked catheters are also
signiﬁcantly more often colonized with Proteus mirabilis and
Providencia stuartii than are patients without blocked catheters
[93]. None of the currently available types of indwelling ure-
thral catheters are capable of resisting encrustation by P. mir-
abilis bioﬁlms in vitro [94, 95], but studies with anti-adherence
agents, such as heparin, are promising [96, 97].
Microbiology. Bacteriuria in patients with short-term cath-
eters is usually caused by a single organism [40]. EscherichiaDownloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article/50/5/625/324341 by MUSC Library user on 12 November 2025

Urinary Catheter Guidelines •CID 2010:50 (1 March) •635coliis the most frequent species isolated, although it comprises
fewer than one-third of isolates [77]. Other Enterobacteriaceae,
such as Klebsiella species, Serratia species, Citrobacter species,
and Enterobacter species, nonfermenters such as P. aeruginosa ,
and gram-positive cocci, including coagulase-negative staphy-lococci and Enterococcus species, are also isolated [77]. Fun-
guria, mostly candiduria, is reported in 3%–32% of patientscatheterized for short periods of time [40, 77]. In contrast topatients with short-term catheterization, UTIs in patients withlong-term catheterization are usually polymicrobial. In additionto the pathogens isolated from patients with short-term cath-eterization, species such as P. mirabilis ,Morganella morganii,
and P. stuartii are common [77]. In these patients, new episodes
of infection often occur periodically in the presence of existinginfection with organisms that may persist for months [20]. Asnoted previously, a urine culture obtained from a patient whosecatheter has a bioﬁlm may not accurately reﬂect the bacteri-ology of bladder urine [89–91]. Organism concentrations in-crease the longer an indwelling catheter is in place and thendecrease signiﬁcantly when a new catheter is inserted [91]. Inpatients with long-term catheterization, urine cultures obtainedbefore and after the catheter was replaced showed that the meanconcentrations of P. mirabilis ,P. stuartii ,M. morganii ,P. aeru-
ginosa, and enterococci were
110-fold higher in the indwelling
catheter than they were in the replacement catheter, whereasconcentrations of E. coli and K. pneumoniae were similar in
the 2 specimens [91]. These data suggest that the catheter ismore important for persistence in the urinary tract with theformer group of uropathogens than with the latter group.
GUIDELINE RECOMMENDATIONS
FOR THE DIAGNOSIS, PREVENTION,AND MANAGEMENT OF CA-ASB AND CA-UTI
I. IN A PATIENT WITH CATHETER DRAINAGE
OF THE BLADDER, WHAT IS THE APPROPRIATE
METHOD OF DIAGNOSING CA-ASB
AND CA-UTI?
Recommendations
1. CA-UTI in patients with indwelling urethral, indwelling
suprapubic, or intermittent catheterization is deﬁned by the
presence of symptoms or signs compatible with UTI with noother identiﬁed source along with /H1109110
3cfu/mL of /H110911 bacterial
species in a single catheter urine specimen or in a midstreamvoided urine specimen from a patient whose urethral, supra-pubic or condom catheter has been removed within the pre-vious 48 h (A-III).
i. Data are insufﬁcient to recommend a speciﬁc quantitative
count for deﬁning CA-UTI in symptomatic men when speci-mens are collected by condom catheter.2. CA-ASB should not be screened for except in research
studies evaluating interventions designed to reduce CA-ASB or
CA-UTI (A-III) and in selected clinical situations, such as inpregnant women (A-III).
i. CA-ASB in patients with indwelling urethral, indwelling
suprapubic, or intermittent catheterization is deﬁned by thepresence of /H1109110
5cfu/mL of /H110911 bacterial species in a single
catheter urine specimen in a patient without symptoms com-patible with UTI (A-III).
ii. CA-ASB in a man with a condom catheter is deﬁned by
the presence of /H1109110
5cfu/mL of /H110911 bacterial species in a single
urine specimen from a freshly applied condom catheter in apatient without symptoms compatible with UTI (A-II).
3. Signs and symptoms compatible with CA-UTI include
new onset or worsening of fever, rigors, altered mental status,malaise, or lethargy with no other identiﬁed cause; ﬂank pain;costovertebral angle tenderness; acute hematuria; pelvic dis-
comfort; and in those whose catheters have been removed,
dysuria, urgent or frequent urination, or suprapubic pain or
tenderness (A-III).
i. In patients with spinal cord injury, increased spasticity,
autonomic dysreﬂexia, or sense of unease are also compatible
with CA-UTI (A-III).
4. In the catheterized patient, pyuria is not diagnostic of
CA-bacteriuria or CA-UTI (AII).
i. The presence, absence, or degree of pyuria should not
be used to differentiate CA-ASB from CA-UTI (A-II).
ii. Pyuria accompanying CA-ASB should not be interpreted
as an indication for antimicrobial treatment (A-II).
iii. The absence of pyuria in a symptomatic patient suggests
a diagnosis other than CA-UTI (A-III).
5. In the catheterized patient, the presence or absence of
odorous or cloudy urine alone should not be used to differ-entiate CA-ASB from CA-UTI or as an indication for urine
culture or antimicrobial therapy (A-III).
Evidence Summary
Signiﬁcant bacteriuria versus contamination. Signiﬁcant
bacteriuria is the quantitative level of bacteriuria consistent with
bladder bacteriuria, rather than contamination, determined on
the basis of growth from a urine specimen collected in a mannerto minimize contamination and transported to the laboratoryin a timely fashion to limit bacterial growth. ASB is deﬁned as
the presence of signiﬁcant bacteriuria in a patient without signs
or symptoms referable to the urinary tract. Symptomatic UTI
is deﬁned as the presence of signiﬁcant bacteriuria in a patientwith signs or symptoms referable to the urinary tract and noalternate source. Because catheter urine specimens are not aslikely to be contaminated by periurethral ﬂora as are voidedurine specimens, low colony counts in a urine sample from aDownloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article/50/5/625/324341 by MUSC Library user on 12 November 2025

636 •CID 2010:50 (1 March) •Hooton et alfreshly placed catheter are more likely to represent true bladder
bacteriuria, compared with low counts in a voided specimen.
There is no standard deﬁnition for signiﬁcant bacteriuria in
catheterized patients. The National Institute on Disability and
Rehabilitation Research (NIDRR) Consensus Statement, enti-
tled “The Prevention and Management of Urinary Tract In-
fection among People with Spinal Cord Injuries,” has deﬁnedsigniﬁcant bacteriuria from indwelling catheter or suprapubic
aspirate specimens as any detectable concentration; /H1109110
2cfu/
mL in a catheter urine specimen from a patient with inter-mittent catheterization; and /H1109110
4cfu/mL in a clean-catch spec-
imen obtained from a catheter-free man with a condom col-
lection device [98]. The NIDRR Consensus Statement has
deﬁned UTI as bacteriuria with tissue invasion and resultant
tissue response with signs and/or symptoms. If antimicrobialtherapy is not given to patients with indwelling catheters whohave colony counts /H1109110
2cfu/mL (or even lower colony counts),
the level of bacteriuria or candiduria uniformly increases to
1105cfu/mL within 24–48 h in those patients who remain
catheterized [99]. Given that colony counts in bladder urineas low as 10
2cfu/mL are associated with symptomatic UTI in
uncatheterized patients [100], that catheter urine specimens are
less likely than other specimens to be contaminated by peri-
urethral ﬂora, and that colony counts rapidly increase in un-
treated catheterized individuals [98], it is reasonable to assume
that colony counts /H11091102cfu/mL are reﬂective of true bladder
bacteriuria in a catheterized person with a freshly placed cath-
eter. Low colony counts in catheter urine specimens are also
reﬂective of signiﬁcant bacteriuria in patients with intermittent
catheterization. One study describing 47 persons with acute
spinal cord injury and intermittent catheterization, 70% ofwhom had symptoms clearly or possibly associated with bac-
teriuria, found that catheter urine specimens with colony
counts /H1109110
2cfu/mL had optimal sensitivity and speciﬁcity,
compared with paired suprapubic aspirates [101]. It should be
noted, however, that most persons with CA-UTI have colonycounts/H1109110
5cfu/mL.
A quantitative count /H11091103cfu/mL in a catheter urine spec-
imen from a symptomatic person with indwelling urethral or
intermittent catheterization is recommended as representing
signiﬁcant bacteriuria, because this threshold is a reasonablecompromise between sensitivity in detecting CA-UTI and fea-sibility for the microbiology laboratory in quantifying organ-
isms (ie, with standard methods, the minimum level of detec-
tion is 10
3cfu/mL). As noted above, even lower colony counts
may reﬂect bladder bacteriuria in a catheterized patient and
may be reasonably interpreted as such by a clinician in decidingwhether to treat or continue treatment in a symptomatic pa-tient. On the other hand, in those situations in which it isdesirable to detect CA-ASB, such as in research studies or inselected populations (eg, pregnant women), /H1109110
5cfu/mL isconsidered indicative of CA-ASB, because increased speciﬁcity
is desirable to reduce overuse of antimicrobials, even though
lower counts may represent bladder bacteriuria. These deﬁni-
tions for signiﬁcant bacteriuria are also reasonable for speci-
mens taken via a suprapubic catheter, although studies have
not been performed to address this.
Urine within condom catheters may develop high concen-
trations of organisms, and the urethra and skin may be colo-nized with uropathogens [16], so it is difﬁcult to distinguish
bladder bacteriuria from skin or mucosal contamination. Thus,
in men with condom catheters, the presence of signiﬁcant bac-
teriuria should be assessed by analysis of a clean-catch mid-
stream urine specimen or a urine specimen collected from a
freshly applied condom catheter after cleaning of the glans. If
urine specimens are collected using a freshly applied condomcatheter, /H1109110
5cfu/mL is the appropriate quantitative criterion
for CA-ASB, with 100% sensitivity, 94% speciﬁcity, 86% pos-
itive predictive value, and 90% negative predictive value for
identifying ASB in the voided specimen, compared with a
paired catheterized specimen [102, 103]. Comparable studies
involving symptomatic men with condom catheters have notbeen performed.
In uncatheterized men with urinary symptoms, a quantitative
count of /H1109110
3cfu/mL of one predominant species in clean-
catch midstream-void urine specimens best differentiated un-infected from infected bladder urine (as determined by urethral
catheterization or suprapubic aspiration) with 97% sensitivity
and 97% speciﬁcity [104]. Thus, we recommend a quantitative
count/H1109110
3cfu/mL in a voided urine specimen as the deﬁnition
of signiﬁcant bacteriuria in a man with urinary symptoms who
has had a urethral, suprapubic, or condom catheter removedwithin 48 h as an indicator of CA-UTI. Deﬁnitions for signif-
icant bacteriuria in asymptomatic men and women who are
not currently catheterized have been published previously
[105]. The National Healthcare Safety Network deﬁnitions for
symptomatic and asymptomatic health care–associated UTI arefor surveillance purposes [106] and are somewhat differentfrom the deﬁnitions used in these guidelines.
The collection of urine specimens. In patients with short-
term catheterization, it is recommended that specimens be ob-tained by sampling through the catheter port using aseptictechnique or, if a port is not present, puncturing the cathetertubing with a needle and syringe [77]. In patients with long-
term indwelling catheters, the preferred method of obtaining
a urine specimen for culture is to replace the catheter and collect
a specimen from the freshly placed catheter. In a symptomaticpatient, this should be done immediately prior to initiatingantimicrobial therapy [89–91, 107]. Culture specimens shouldnot be obtained from the drainage bag.
Other laboratory tests that might be useful to differentiate
CA-ASB from CA-UTI. Pyuria is evidence of inﬂammationDownloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article/50/5/625/324341 by MUSC Library user on 12 November 2025

Urinary Catheter Guidelines •CID 2010:50 (1 March) •637in the genitourinary tract and is usually present in CA-UTI, as
well as in CA-ASB. In 761 newly catheterized patients in a
university hospital, the sensitivity of pyuria for CA-bacteriuria
(1105cfu/mL; almost all patients were asymptomatic) was 47%,
the speciﬁcity was 90%, and the positive predictive value was
32% [108]. The sensitivity of pyuria for detecting infections
due to enterococci or yeasts appears to be lower than that forgram-negative bacilli [105]. The low sensitivity of pyuria for
identiﬁcation of CA-bacteriuria in patients with short-term
catheterization contrasts with that in patients catheterized for
longer durations [109]. In 177 sequential quantitative cultures
and urinalyses from 14 patients with long-term urinary cath-
eters during a 12-month period, bacteriuria and pyuria were
common even during asymptomatic periods, and levels of py-
uria and bacteriuria did not change substantially during symp-tomatic episodes [110]. Studies have shown that pyuria is alsonot helpful in establishing a diagnosis in patients with neu-
rogenic bladders [111, 112]. Dipstick testing for nitrites and
leukocyte esterase was also shown to be unhelpful in establish-
ing a diagnosis in catheterized patients hospitalized in the ICU
[113]. Thus, in the catheterized patient, pyuria is not diagnosticof CA-bacteriuria or CA-UTI, and the presence, absence, or
degree of pyuria alone does not, by itself, differentiate CA-ASB
from CA-UTI. However, the absence of pyuria in a symptom-
atic catheterized patient suggests a diagnosis other than CA-
UTI.
Symptoms and signs suggestive of UTI in a catheterized
patient. Catheterized patients with CA-UTI usually do not
manifest the classic symptoms of dysuria, frequent urination,
and urgent urination, although such symptoms may occur in
CA-UTI after the catheter has been removed. In addition, pa-tients with neurogenic bladders frequently have absence of sen-
sation in the pelvis, and ascertainment of potential symptoms
of UTI is often difﬁcult. The majority of patients with CA-
bacteriuria lack symptoms referable to the urinary tract [40].
When 1497 newly catheterized patients were observed pro-spectively with daily urine cultures, urine leukocyte counts, andsymptom assessment, 224 patients developed 235 episodes of
CA-bacteriuria (deﬁned as a colony count
1103cfu/mL; 85%
of patients had a colony count of 1105cfu/mL in at least 1
culture). Of 194 patients with CA-bacteriuria who could re-
spond to symptom assessment, only 15 (8%) reported subjec-tive symptoms referable to the urinary tract, including pain,
urgent urination, or dysuria, although bacteriuria and pyuria
were present in most patients for many days. In addition, there
were no signiﬁcant differences between catheterized patientswith and those without CA-bacteriuria with respect to signs orsymptoms commonly associated with UTI (fever, dysuria, ur-gent urination, or ﬂank pain) or with respect to leukocytosis.Thus, for a hospitalized patient with an indwelling urinarycatheter, symptoms referable to the urinary tract, fever, or pe-ripheral leukocytosis have little predictive value for the diag-
nosis of CA-UTI. The lack of an association between fever and
CA-bacteriuria has also been convincingly demonstrated in
studies of LTCF residents. A prospective study by Kunin et al
[52] involving elderly nursing home patients found that, al-
though 74% of catheterized patients developed CA-bacteriuria,
!2% had a temperature 138/H11034C. Likewise, in a LTCF, the inci-
dence of febrile episodes of possible urinary origin was 1.1 cases
per 100 patient-days of catheterization, despite a high preva-
lence of CA-bacteriuria, and most fever episodes resolved spon-
taneously [28].
The foul smell of urine around patients with urine incon-
tinence is thought to be attributable mainly to the production
of ammonia from urea by bacterial ureases [114]. Foul-smelling
and/or cloudy urine is often interpreted as warranting anti-
microbial treatment in catheterized patients with bacteriuria[115]. However, not all individuals with UTI have an unpleasantodor to their urine, and not all urine with an unpleasant odor
is indicative of bacteriuria [116]. No studies have demonstrated
that odorous or cloudy urine in a catheterized individual, even
if these ﬁndings are new, has clinical signiﬁcance. Thus, odorous
or cloudy urine should not be used alone to determine thepresence of CA-bacteriuria and, in particular, to distinguish
CA-ASB from CA-UTI, and alternate interventions, such asimproved continence management or hydration, rather than
antimicrobial therapy, should be instituted [116, 117].
Unfortunately, most signs and symptoms in bacteriuric cath-
eterized patients are nonspeciﬁc and place a burden on the
clinician who wishes to use antimicrobials appropriately. Cath-eterized patients should be thoroughly evaluated for the sourceof signs and symptoms before attributing them to the urinarytract. Algorithms have been developed and validated to opti-mize urine culturing and antimicrobial use for patients hos-pitalized in LTCFs with suspected UTI [118]. For catheterizedpatients, symptoms appropriate for obtaining a culture andinitiating antimicrobial therapy include new costovertebral ten-derness, rigors, or new onset of delirium. Use of these algo-rithms has been shown to reduce the number of antimicrobialprescriptions with no resulting adverse events in LTCF resi-dents, but few catheterized patients were included in these stud-ies [118, 119]. Algorithms for use in the treatment of hospi-talized patients have not been developed. In patients with spinalcord injury, the NIDRR Consensus Statement [98] listed signsand symptoms that are suggestive of CA-UTI, including dis-comfort or pain over the kidney or bladder or during urination,onset of urinary incontinence, fever, increased spasticity, au-tonomic hypereﬂexia, malaise, lethargy, or sense of unease.When no alternate source of symptoms is identiﬁed in patientswith CA-bacteriuria, it is reasonable to monitor symptoms andtreat only if the symptoms do not resolve.Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article/50/5/625/324341 by MUSC Library user on 12 November 2025

638 •CID 2010:50 (1 March) •Hooton et alTable 2. Acceptable Indications for Indwelling Urinary Catheter Use
Indication Comment(s)
Clinically signiﬁcant urinary retention Temporary relief or longer-term drainage if medical therapy is not effective and surgical cor-
rection is not indicated.
Urinary incontinence For comfort in a terminally ill patient; if less invasive measures (eg, behavioral and pharmaco-
logical interventions or incontinence pads) fail and external collecting devices are not an
acceptable alternative.
Accurate urine output monitoring required Frequent or urgent monitoring needed, such as with critically ill patients.
Patient unable or unwilling to collect urine During prolonged surgical procedures with general or spinal anesthesia; selected urological
and gynecological procedures in the perioperative period.
NOTE. Adapted from [30, 120 121].
II. WHAT STRATEGIES MAY BE USED TO HELP
REDUCE THE RISK OF CA-UTI?
In the recommendations that follow, the focus is the effect of
interventions on CA-UTI. When a recommendation is providedwithout reference to type of infection, CA-UTI is assumed. Onthe other hand, when data were available, the Panel agreed toalso provide a ranking with supporting level of evidence forrecommendations for or against interventions shown to impactCA-ASB or CA-bacteriuria. However, we do not know withcertainty whether interventions shown to reduce CA-ASB butnot CA-UTI (or vice versa) similarly reduce CA-UTI (or viceversa).
As noted previously, any combination of Strength of Rec-
ommendation and Quality of Evidence is possible. For example,there are convincing data (Quality of Evidence I) that systemicantimicrobial therapy reduces CA-UTI in studies of patientswho undergo surgical procedures and have short-term cathe-terization. However, the Panel felt strongly that prophylacticantimicrobials should not be given routinely for the preventionof CA-UTI in this setting because of the potential problem ofantimicrobial resistance, and we ranked this recommendationA-III. The Quality of Evidence provided after each recommen-dation below thus pertains to the overall recommendation,which weighs both the pros and cons of a preventive measure.
REDUCTION OF INAPPROPRIATE URINARY
CATHETER INSERTION AND DURATION
Limiting Unnecessary Catheterization
Recommendations
6. Indwelling catheters should be placed only when they are
indicated (A-III).
i. Indwelling urinary catheters should not be used for the
management of urinary incontinence (A-III). In exceptionalcases, when all other approaches to management of inconti-nence have not been effective, it may be considered at patientrequest.
7. Institutions should develop a list of appropriate indica-
tions for inserting indwelling urinary catheters, educate staffabout such indications, and periodically assess adherence to the
institution-speciﬁc guidelines (A-III).
8. Institutions should require a physician’s order in the chart
before an indwelling catheter is placed (A-III).
9. Institutions should consider use of portable bladder scan-
ners to determine whether catheterization is necessary for post-
operative patients (B-II).
Evidence Summary
Interventions that reduce urinary catheterization ultimately re-
duce CA-ASB and CA-UTI. Studies have repeatedly docu-mented that urinary catheters are often inserted for inappro-
priate reasons or remain in situ longer than necessary. Generally
accepted indications for use of indwelling urinary catheters are
shown in Table 2. In a prospective study that described 202
hospitalized patients with urinary catheters, the initial indica-tion for catheter use was judged to be inappropriate in 21%,
and continued catheterization was judged to be inappropriate
for almost one-half of catheter-days [120]. In the medical ICU,
many unjustiﬁed catheter-days were attributed to presumed
monitoring of urine output when this was no longer clinically
relevant. No clear indication was apparent in 26% of the un-
justiﬁed catheter-days. On medical wards, urinary incontinence
was the major reason for unjustiﬁed initial and continued uri-nary catheterization. Other studies report 38%–50% of cath-eterizations had no justiﬁable indication [122, 123], and 200
(36%) of 562 catheter-days were judged to be unnecessary [27].
In one community teaching hospital, an inappropriate indi-
cation for catheterization was identiﬁed for 54% of patients,physician or nurse explicit documentation giving the reasonfor catheter placement was found for only 13% of catheteri-
zations, and there was no written order for catheterization in
33% of charts [124].
A retrospective cohort study involving 170,791 US Medicare
patients who were admitted to skilled nursing facilities after
discharge from hospitals after major surgery found that hos-pitalization in the Northeastern or Southern United States wasassociated with a lower likelihood of admission to a nursingfacility with an indwelling urinary catheter, compared with hos-Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article/50/5/625/324341 by MUSC Library user on 12 November 2025

Urinary Catheter Guidelines •CID 2010:50 (1 March) •639pitalization in the Western United States ( and Pp.002 Pp
, respectively) [125]. After adjusting for patient character-.03
istics, the patients with catheters had greater odds of rehos-
pitalization for UTI and death within 30 days than did patients
who did not have catheters. The reason for these regional dif-
ferences is unclear, but the differences are consistent with re-
gional variations in the use of many health care services by the
Medicare population [126]. Urinary catheters are not routinely
indicated when patients are transferred from LTCFs to other
health care facilities.
Clinicians are often unaware that their patients are cathe-
terized. In one study, physicians and medical students respon-
sible for patients who were admitted to the medical services at
4 university-afﬁliated hospitals were asked to identify whichpatients on their service had an indwelling urethral catheter
[126]. Providers were unaware of catheterization for 88 (28%)
of the 319 provider-patient observations: this rate was 21% for
students, 22% for interns, 27% for residents, and 38% for
attending physicians. Catheter use was considered to be in-
appropriate in 36 (31%) of the 117 patients with a catheter.Among patients with inappropriate catheterization, health care
providers were unaware of catheter use for 44 (41%) of the
108 provider-patient observations. Catheterization was more
likely to be appropriate if respondents were aware of the cath-
eter ( ). P
!.001
Several strategies appear to be effective in reducing inap-
propriate insertion of catheters. In a pre-post study in an emer-
gency department, an intervention consisting of education and
use of an indication sheet produced a dramatic reduction inthe total number of catheters used but had a smaller impact
on appropriateness of use and documentation in the medical
record [127]. The total number of catheters placed after the
intervention (in 2003) decreased from 2029 in 2001 and 2188
in 2002 to 300 in 2004 and 512 in 2005. In 2003, just prior to
the intervention, compared with just after the intervention,
appropriate use of catheters increased from 37% to 51%
( ), and physician orders for catheter placement signif-Pp.06
icantly increased from 43% to 63% ( ) [127]. In a con- P
!.01
trolled, prospective, pre-post study involving 1328 adult pa-tients scheduled for orthopedic (intervention group) or
abdominal (control group) surgery, a multifaceted intervention
whereby urinary catheterization in the operating room andpostanesthesia care unit was restricted to patients with speciﬁedconditions together with prompt catheter removal on the post-
operative surgical ward led to a reduction in the frequency
(31.5% vs 24.0%; ) and duration of catheterization Pp.052
(5.0 vs 3.9 days; ) [128]. The rate of UTI, which was Pp.02
not clearly deﬁned, decreased from 10.4 to 3.9 cases per 100
patients (incidence density ratio, 0.41; 95% CI, 0.20–0.79), andantimicrobial use for UTI also decreased ( ). In a study P
!.001
involving 60 postoperative patients with urinary retention, re-catheterization and CA-bacteriuria rates were similar (and verylow in each group) for patients randomized to indwelling orintermittent urethral catheterization for 24 h after the operation[129].
Use of a portable ultrasound bladder scanner to assess blad-
der volumes also has the potential to reduce unnecessary cath-eterization. Bladder scanning has been shown to be an accuratemeasure of bladder volume in some [130, 131] but not all [132]studies. In a pre-post study of patients after orthopedic surgery,1920 patients were evaluated and catheterized if there was nospontaneous diuresis by 8 h after surgery during a 4-monthobservation period; 31% of the patients were catheterized, and18 developed CA-UTI. In a subsequent 4-month period, 2196patients were evaluated and catheterized only if the bladdervolume was
1800 mL 8 h after surgery; 16% were catheterized,
and 5 developed CA-UTI [131]. Use of portable bladder ul-trasound devices warrants further study in the care of oliguricpatients [133, 134].
Discontinuation of Catheter
Recommendations
10. Indwelling catheters should be removed as soon as they
are no longer required to reduce the risk of CA-bacteriuria (A-I) and CA-UTI (A-II).
11. Institutions should consider nurse-based or electronic
physician reminder systems to reduce inappropriate urinarycatheterization (A-II) and CA-UTI (A-II).
12. Institutions should consider automatic stop-orders to
reduce inappropriate urinary catheterization (B-I).
Evidence Summary
The optimal time at which to remove indwelling urethral cath-eters, once they are no longer required for patient management,has not been determined. A Cochrane review of randomizedand quasi-randomized, controlled trials that compared the ef-fects of alternative strategies for removal of short-term in-dwelling urethral catheters on patient outcomes found 13 trialsthat investigated the effects of different durations of catheter-ization after treatment for urethral strictures, acute retentionof urine, and various surgical procedures [135]. There was anincreasing risk of CA-bacteriuria with later catheter removalirrespective of sex. Another Cochrane review of patients afterundergoing urogenital surgical procedures [136], in which thereis some overlap with the previously mentioned review in termsof the studies reviewed [135], also reported a lower risk of CA-bacteriuria when the catheter was removed earlier (1 day vs 3days; relative risk [RR], 0.50; 95% CI, 0.29–0.87). In neitherreview were recatheterization rates consistently higher in thegroups in which catheters were removed earlier.
Several strategies have been shown to be effective in reducing
the duration of catheterization and CA-UTI. Using a pre-postDownloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article/50/5/625/324341 by MUSC Library user on 12 November 2025

640 •CID 2010:50 (1 March) •Hooton et alintervention design in an ICU setting in a large Taiwanese
hospital, daily prompts to remove unnecessary catheters by the
nursing staff to physicians starting 5 days after hospital ad-
mission signiﬁcantly decreased the duration of catheterization
(from 7.0 to 4.6 days; ) and the incidence of CA-UTI P!.001
(from 11.5 to 8.3 patients per 1000 catheter-days; ) Pp.009
[137]. Another pre-post intervention study involving 2412 pa-tients in a tertiary hospital in Thailand evaluated nurse-based
reminders to physicians to remove unnecessary catheters 3 days
after insertion [138]. The intervention reduced the rate of in-
appropriate urinary catheterization (pre-intervention vs post-
intervention rate, 20% vs 11%; , the rate of CA-UTI Pp.04)
(21.5 vs 5.2 infections per 1000 catheter-days; ), the P
!.001
duration of urinary catheterization (mean duration, 11 vs 3days; ), and the duration of hospitalization (mean du- P
!.001
ration, 16 vs 5 days; ). The monthly hospital costs for P!.001
antimicrobials to treat CA-UTI were also reduced by 63% and
the hospitalization cost for each patient during the intervention
was reduced by 58%. Using a pre-post controlled trial design,
2 of 4 wards at an academic medical center were assigned to
an intervention group, and 2 wards served as controls [139].
The intervention consisted of a nurse-based written reminder
placed on the chart of catheterized patients to remind the phy-
sicians that their patients were catheterized. The mean length
of time that patients were catheterized increased by 15.1% in
the control group but decreased by 7.6% in the intervention
group ( ), with no statistically signiﬁcant difference in Pp.007
urethral recatheterizations between the 2 groups.
Computer reminders can be effective in improving patient
care [140]. Using a before-and-after cross-over design, use ofa computer-based order for placing an indwelling urinary cath-
eter was found to decrease the average duration of catheteri-
zation from 8 to 5 days ( ) on a medicine and cardiology Pp.03
service with no impact on recatheterization rates [141]. Of 36patients who were on the study ward when their catheters were
placed, 33 (92%) had the order documented in the medical
record, compared with only 10 (29%) of 34 on the control
ward ( ). Another pre-post study used prompts in the P
!.001
computerized order/entry system together with handheld blad-
der scanners, staff education, and nurse empowerment and
reported an 81% reduction in device use (calculated as the
percentage of urinary catheter–days per 1000 patient-days) and
a 69% reduction in the rate of CA-UTI (36 vs 11 cases per1000 catheter-days; ) [142]. P
!.001
A recent Canadian randomized, controlled trial involving 692
hospitalized patients with indwelling urinary catheters in placefor/H1108848 h tested whether prewritten orders for the removal of
urinary catheters if speciﬁed criteria were not met, with follow-up by a research nurse, reduced catheterization days, comparedwith usual care [36]. Stop-orders listed 6 criteria as acceptablefor a urinary catheter: urinary obstruction, neurogenic bladderand urinary retention, urological surgery, ﬂuid challenge for
acute renal failure, open sacral wound care for incontinent
patients, and comfort care for incontinence in terminal illness.
There were fewer days of inappropriate and total urinary cath-
eter use in the intervention group than there were in the usual
care group (2.20 vs 3.89 days [difference, /H110021.69 days; 95% CI,
/H110021.23 to /H110022.15 days; ] and 3.70 vs 5.04 days [differ- P
!.001
ence,/H110021.34 days; 95% CI, /H110020.64 to /H110022.05 days; ], P!.001
respectively). However, there was no signiﬁcant difference in
the CA-bacteriuria rates between the 2 groups (19% vs 20%)
or CA-UTI (2.1% in each group), perhaps because of the low
overall reduction in duration of catheterization (1.34 days), the
exposure of 58% of study participants to antimicrobials, and
the lack of urine cultures obtained at study completion in ∼25%
of patients. Nevertheless, it is unclear whether such an inter-
vention could reduce the duration of catheterization to a degree
necessary to reduce the risk of CA-bacteriuria or CA-UTI. Of
note, the Panel did not ﬁnd any evidence that the routine useof urinary catheters in patients with pressure ulcers improved
wound healing when compared with other measures to prevent
urinary incontinence. Therefore, in contrast with other recentguidelines [143, 144], the Panel did not recommend the pres-ence of sacral ulcers as an appropriate indication for routineurinary catheter placement.
Danish national guidelines issued in 1985 encouraged a re-
strictive policy for use of urinary catheterization. In a 1995
survey to assess compliance of hospitals and LTCFs with thenational recommendations, 84% of hospitals but only 27% of
LTCFs reported daily or weekly review of whether to continue
indwelling catheterization [145]. There are no national US
guidelines similar to the Danish guidelines, and most US hos-
pitals report that they do not have systems to monitor place-
ment of urinary catheters or duration of urinary catheterization
[7].
STRATEGIES TO CONSIDER PRIOR
TO CATHETER INSERTION
Infection Prevention
Recommendations
13. Hospitals and LTCFs should develop, maintain, and pro-
mulgate policies and procedures for recommended catheter in-
sertion indications, insertion and maintenance techniques, dis-continuation strategies, and replacement indications (A-III).
i. Strategies should include education and training of staff
relevant to these policies and procedures (A-III).
14. Institutions may consider feedback of CA-bacteriuria
rates to nurses and physicians on a regular basis to reduce therisk of CA-bacteriuria (C-II).
i. Data are insufﬁcient to make a recommendation as toDownloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article/50/5/625/324341 by MUSC Library user on 12 November 2025

Urinary Catheter Guidelines •CID 2010:50 (1 March) •641whether such an intervention might reduce the risk of CA-
UTI.
15. Data are insufﬁcient to make a recommendation as to
whether institutions should place patients with indwelling uri-nary catheters in different rooms from other patients who haveindwelling urinary catheters or other invasive devices to reducethe risk of CA-bacteriuria or CA-UTI.
Evidence Summary
Intensive infection surveillance and prevention programs in UShospitals are strongly associated with reductions in the rates ofnosocomial UTI [146]. Updated evidence-based guidelines havebeen recently published for prevention of CA-UTIs among hos-pitalized patients [143, 147] and residents of LTCFs [6, 147].Institutions should incorporate optimal strategies for the pre-vention of CA-UTI in their infection prevention programs. Ata minimum, the program should include appropriate indica-tions for urinary catheterization, recommended insertion andmaintenance techniques, discontinuation strategies, and cath-eter change indications.
Infection prevention programs should also address whether
it is beneﬁcial to segregate catheterized patients to reduce therisk of cross-infection, given that cross-infection in hospitalsand presumably in LTCFs is common [50, 63, 148]. In a 1-month case-control study involving 40 LTCF residents withindwelling catheters and bacteriuria, 20 of whom were nursedtogether and 20 of whom were nursed in separate rooms, therewas a higher transmission rate of urinary strains between pa-tients within rooms (5 of 9 possible transmissions) than be-tween patients in separate rooms (9 of 53 possible transmis-sions) ( ), suggesting that catheterized patients should Pp.02
be segregated in different rooms whenever possible [149]. Onthe other hand, in a 6-month study of cross-infection in whichthe drainage bags of 12% of catheterized patients had microbialcontamination, there was no cross-infection identiﬁed among87 pairs of catheterized roommates and only 1 possible cross-infection identiﬁed among
1700 pairs of catheterized patients
simultaneously residing on the same nursing unit [150].
Feedback of infection rates and other relevant indices to
physicians and other health care workers has been followed byreduced rates of CA-bacteriuria, presumably by drawing atten-tion and improving adherence to good infection preventiontechniques. In a pre-post study in which the intervention wasthe daily recording of hospitalized patients’ urine culture in-formation in their charts, CA-bacteriuria rates decreased sig-niﬁcantly, from 17.9% to 12.5% [39]. However, the authorsconcluded that routine daily bacteriologic monitoring of urinespecimens from all catheterized patients was not an efﬁcientway to decrease the incidence of CA-UTI. In another pre-poststudy involving hospitalized patients in which nursing staffmembers were provided with a quarterly report of CA-bacte-riuria rates by unit, the CA-bacteriuria rate decreased from 32to 17.4 cases per 1000 catheter-days over the 18-month inter-vention period [151]. A pre-post study in ICUs in a hospitalin Argentina that evaluated education and performance feed-back regarding catheter care measures and hand washing com-pliance reported a signiﬁcant reduction in CA-UTI rates, from21.3 to 12.4 cases per 1000 catheter-days (RR, 0.58; 95% CI,0.39–0.86; ) [152]. Pp.006
Many hospitals have not implemented infection prevention
recommendations relevant to CA-bacteriuria. Saint and col-leagues recently reported a national study of US hospitals thatdescribed practices used to reduce hospital-acquired UTI [7,153]. Overall, 56% of hospitals did not have a system for mon-itoring which patients had urinary catheters placed, and 74%did not monitor duration of catheterization. There was nosingle strategy that appeared to be widely used to reduce hos-pital-acquired UTI. For example, 30% of hospitals reportedregularly using antimicrobial urinary catheters and portablebladder scanners, 14% used condom catheters, and 9% usedcatheter reminders [7]. In a companion qualitative study thatconsisted of semistructured phone interviews and in-personinterviews with personnel in 14 diverse hospitals, several keythemes emerged [153]. First, although preventing hospital-ac-quired UTI was a low priority for most hospitals, there wassubstantial recognition of the value of early removal of a urinarycatheter for patients. Second, those hospitals that made UTIprevention a high priority had committed advocates who fa-cilitated prevention activities. Third, hospital-speciﬁc pilotstudies were important in deciding whether to use devices suchas antimicrobial-impregnated catheters. Finally, external forces,such as public reporting, inﬂuenced UTI surveillance and in-fection prevention activities.
CA-bacteriuria is common and has important implications
for patient health. Thus, prevention of CA-bacteriuria and/orCA-UTI should receive high priority in infection preventionprograms. In this regard, the link between hospital-acquiredinfection prevention and patient safety promotion has beenrecently highlighted [139]. Although US hospitals have notwidely implemented strategies to reduce hospital-acquired UTI[7], this may change with the Centers for Medicare and Med-icaid Services modiﬁcation of the hospital reimbursement sys-tem, which is designed to eliminate payments previously pro-vided to hospitals for the treatment of preventable complica-tions during hospitalization, such as CA-UTI [8, 154].
Alternatives to Indwelling Urethral Catheterization
Recommendations
16. In men for whom a urinary catheter is indicated and
who have minimal postvoid residual urine, condom catheter-ization should be considered as an alternative to short-term(A-II) and long-term (B-II) indwelling catheterization to reduceCA-bacteriuria in those who are not cognitively impaired.Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article/50/5/625/324341 by MUSC Library user on 12 November 2025

642 •CID 2010:50 (1 March) •Hooton et ali. Data are insufﬁcient to make a recommendation as to
whether condom catheterization is preferable to short-term or
long-term indwelling urethral catheterization for reduction ofCA-UTI.
ii. Data are insufﬁcient to make a recommendation as to
whether condom catheterization is preferable to short-term orlong-term indwelling urethral catheterization for reduction ofCA-bacteriuria in those who are cognitively impaired.
17. Intermittent catheterization should be considered as an
alternative to short-term (C-I) or long-term (A-III) indwellingurethral catheterization to reduce CA-bacteriuria and an alter-native to short-term (C-III) or long-term (A-III) indwellingurethral catheterization to reduce CA-UTI.
18. Suprapubic catheterization may be considered as an al-
ternative to short-term indwelling urethral catheterization toreduce CA-bacteriuria (B-I) and CA-UTI (C-III).
i. Data are insufﬁcient to make a recommendation as to
whether suprapubic catheterization is preferable to long-termindwelling urethral catheterization for reduction of CA-bac-teriuria or CA-UTI.
ii. Data are insufﬁcient to make a recommendation as to
whether intermittent catheterization is preferable to suprapubiccatheterization for reduction of CA-bacteriuria or CA-UTI.
Intermittent Catheterization Technique
Recommendations
19. Clean (nonsterile) rather than sterile technique may be
considered in outpatient (A-III) and institutional (B-I) settingswith no difference in risk of CA-bacteriuria or CA-UTI.
20. Multiple-use catheters may be considered instead of ster-
ile single-use catheters in outpatient (B-III) and institutional(C-I) settings with no difference in risk of CA-bacteriuria orCA-UTI.
21. Data are insufﬁcient to make a recommendation as to
whether one method of cleaning multiple-use catheters is su-perior to another.
22. Hydrophilic catheters are not recommended for routine
use to reduce the risk of CA-bacteriuria (B-II) or CA-UTI (B-II).
23. Data are insufﬁcient to make recommendations on
whether use of portable bladder scanners or “no-touch” tech-nique reduces the risk of CA-UTI, compared with standardcare.
Evidence Summary
Alternatives to indwelling urethral catheterization include in-termittent catheterization, suprapubic catheterization, and theuse of external collection devices, including condom catheters,diapers or pads.
Indications and limitations of intermittent catheterization.
Guttman and Frankel [155] in 1966 described intermittentcatheterization using sterile technique in patients with neuro-genic bladders. Lapides et al [156] later demonstrated in ob-
servational studies that the clean (nonsterile) technique was
safe and associated with a low incidence of complications. In-
termittent catheterization is widely viewed to be associated with
fewer complications, compared with indwelling urethral cath-
eterization, including fewer instances of CA-bacteriuria, pyelo-nephritis, epididymitis, periurethral abscess, urethral stricture,
vesicoureteral reﬂux, hydronephrosis, bladder and renal calculi,
bladder cancer, and autonomic dysreﬂexia [22, 24, 157, 158].
In a 38-month prospective observational study involving 128
patients with acute spinal cord injuries, the incidence rates per
100 person-days for CA-bacteriuria and CA-UTI, respectively,
were 5 and 2.72 cases for men with indwelling urethral catheters
(128 patients), 2.95 and 0.41 cases for men with clean inter-
mittent catheterization (124 patients), 2.41 and 0.36 cases for
men with condom catheters (41 patients), and 0.96 and 0.34cases for women with suprapubic catheterization (10 patients),respectively [25]. Although there are no randomized, controlled
trials that have compared long-term catheterization methods
(intermittent urethral catheterization, indwelling urethral or
suprapubic catheterization, and external catheter for men) in
managing voiding problems in patients with [159] or withoutneurogenic bladders, clean intermittent catheterization has be-
come the standard of care for appropriate women and menwith spinal cord injuries [16]. In addition, clean intermittent
catheterization is a more commonly used alternative in men
with bladder atonia and elderly patients who need assistancewith voiding [21, 77, 160].
In contrast to patients with long-term catheterization, pa-
tients with short-term catheterization have been the subject of
randomized trials of catheterization techniques. A recent Coch-rane review of randomized or quasi-randomized trials thatcompared catheterization methods in patients who underwentshort-term bladder drainage (/H11088 14 days duration) found 2 trials
(both involving patients who underwent surgical procedures)that compared indwelling urethral catheterization with inter-mittent catheterization [161]. The meta-analysis showed thatsigniﬁcantly more cases of CA-bacteriuria occurred in the in-dwelling urethral catheterization group (RR, 2.90; 95% CI,1.44–5.84).
Intermittent catheterization is not commonly used for short-
term catheterization, however, because of the educational, mo-tivational, and staff-time requirements necessary for its imple-mentation and because of discomfort in sensate patients. Otherlimitations to intermittent catheterization include the inabilityor unwillingness of patients to perform frequent catheterizationbecause of comorbid conditions or discomfort, or abnormalurethral anatomy, such as stricture, false passages, or bladderneck obstruction. Upper extremity impairment because of cer-vical spinal cord injury or other abnormality, obesity, and spas-Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article/50/5/625/324341 by MUSC Library user on 12 November 2025

Urinary Catheter Guidelines •CID 2010:50 (1 March) •643ticity also make intermittent catheterization challenging for
both male and female patients.
Techniques used for intermittent catheterization. There
are many different techniques used in intermittent catheteri-
zation, such as sterile or clean technique, use of sterile or mul-
tiple-use catheters with the clean technique, whether a multiple-
use catheter is changed daily or weekly, and use of hydrophilicor standard catheters. The main difference between sterile and
clean (single-use) technique is that sterile gloves and drapes are
used for the former but not for the latter technique. Studies
that compared these techniques among patients managed with
intermittent catheterization were evaluated in a recent Coch-
rane review [162]. The authors found studies to be method-
ologically weak, to have small sample sizes, and, in several trials,
to combine use of catheters and of techniques leading to pos-sible confounding. Nevertheless, the Cochrane authors con-cluded from a meta-analysis of these trials involving inpatients
and outpatients with and without neurogenic bladders who
received intermittent catheterization that there was no differ-
ence in the risk of CA-bacteriuria or CA-UTI with use of sterile
or clean technique, with use of sterile catheters (single-use) ormultiple-use catheters using the clean technique, or with use
of multiple-use catheters changed daily or weekly using the
clean technique [160, 163–167]. There are no randomized, con-
trolled studies that compared clean or sterile technique for
intermittently catheterized patients in the outpatient setting,
although the clean technique is widely used by outpatients.
Although there are no data that indicate that reusing urinary
catheters when performing intermittent catheterization in-
creases infection risk, it may be inconvenient for many patients
who ﬁnd it difﬁcult to clean their catheters away from home,and some patients ﬁnd it unaesthetic.
The Cochrane review also evaluated randomized, controlled
trials of coated (hydrophilic or prelubricated with water soluble
gel) or uncoated (separate lubricant) catheters in adults and
children managed with intermittent catheterization [162]. Hy-drophilic catheters are characterized by having a layer of poly-mer coating that is bound to the catheter surface that absorbs
and binds water to the catheter, which results in reduced friction
on catheter insertion and reduced urethral inﬂammation [168].
These catheters have been associated with improved patientsatisfaction in some [169] but not all [166] studies. A cross-over trial involving men with prostate enlargement showed no
reduction in CA-bacteriuria or CA-UTI with the hydrophilic
catheter [166]. Three parallel group trials compared a hydro-
philic catheter with an uncoated catheter and reported data onCA-UTI [170–172]. In the largest of these 3 studies, a ran-domized study involving 123 male patients with spinal cordinjury, there were fewer patients with CA-UTI in the hydro-philic catheter group, compared with the uncoated cathetergroup (39 [64%] of 61 vs 51 [82%] of 62; RR, 0.78; 95% CI,0.62–0.97) [162, 170]. However, only 57 (46%) of the 123
subjects completed the 12-month study. The estimates from
the smaller trials had wide conﬁdence intervals that straddled
the no-difference line [162, 171, 172]. In summary, current
evidence does not support the routine use of hydrophilic cath-
eters to reduce CA-bacteriuria, CA-UTI, or sequelae of urethral
trauma in patients managed with intermittent catheterization[162, 173], but further studies are warranted.
In patients who undergo intermittent catheterization, ascen-
sion of bacteria colonizing the urethra into the bladder is more
likely to be the source of CA-bacteriuria than is exogenous
bacteria colonizing the catheter. Nevertheless, several proce-
dures have been evaluated and have been shown to reduce
bacterial contamination of reusable catheters, including rinsing
catheters with running tap water after every use, air-drying,and keeping the catheters dry until reuse [174]; microwavingcatheters [175–178]; and soaking catheters in hydrogen per-
oxide, bleach, or betadine [179]. However, there are no pub-
lished trials evaluating the effectiveness of any of these cleaning
methods in preventing CA-bacteriuria or CA-UTI among pa-
tients with intermittent catheterization.
In patients who undergo intermittent catheterization, port-
able bladder scanners accurately assess bladder volumes [180–
183]. In addition, studies that compared volume-dependent
and time-dependent intermittent catheterization with these de-
vices have shown the volume-dependent method to reduce
incontinence, number of catheterizations, and cost [184–186].
However, the effectiveness of these devices in preventing CA-
bacteriuria or CA-UTI in patients who undergo intermittent
catheterization has not been reported.
Use of the “no-touch” technique of intermittent catheteri-
zation (in which the catheter and preattached collecting systemare not touched by the patient) reduces microbial contami-
nation of the catheter [187]. Although studies have not been
published that evaluate the effect of this technique on the risk
of CA-bacteriuria or CA-UTI among patients with intermittentcatheterization, it is unlikely to be superior to the sterile tech-nique, which has not been demonstrated to be superior to the
clean technique.
Indications and limitations of suprapubic catheterization.
Potential advantages of suprapubic catheters in patients who
need bladder drainage, compared with indwelling urethral cath-eters, include lower risk of CA-bacteriuria, reduced risk of ure-
thral trauma and stricture, ability to attempt normal voiding
without the need for recatheterization, and less interference
with sexual activity. In the Cochrane review of randomized orquasi-randomized trials involving patients (almost all of whomwere postsurgical patients) who underwent short-term bladderdrainage ( /H1108814 days duration), 14 trials were found that com-
pared indwelling urethral catheterization with suprapubic cath-eterization [161]. These trials showed that patients with in-Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article/50/5/625/324341 by MUSC Library user on 12 November 2025

644 •CID 2010:50 (1 March) •Hooton et aldwelling urethral catheterization had more cases of CA-
bacteriuria (RR, 2.60; 95% CI, 2.12–3.18), more recatheteri-
zation (RR, 4.12; 95% CI, 2.94–7.56), and greater discomfort
(RR, 2.98; 95% CI, 2.31–3.85). In the one trial that reported
data on CA-UTI, there was no statistically signiﬁcant difference
between the 2 catheterization techniques. A review of random-
ized, controlled trials that compared indwelling urethral andsuprapubic catheters among patients who underwent colorectal
surgery had similar conclusions [188]. A more recent pro-
spective randomized trial that compared clean intermittent self-
catheterization and suprapubic catheterization in a group of
248 women after urogynecologic surgery showed no statistically
signiﬁcant difference in the risk of CA-ASB (23% vs 31%;
), but patients with intermittent catheterization re- Pp.23
ported more frustration ( ) and more difﬁculty ( Pp.01 Pp
) [189]..003
Even though suprapubic catheterization appears to have ad-
vantages over indwelling urethral catheterization, it is not com-
monly used, except perhaps in gynecologic and urologic sur-
gical procedures in some centers. The use of suprapubic
catheterization is limited, because catheter insertion is an in-
vasive procedure with risks of bleeding and visceral injury, the
patient can still leak through the urethra, and—a problem es-
pecially for patients with long-term catheterization—specially
trained caregivers are often needed to change the catheters.
Further comparisons of intermittent urethral catheterization,
suprapubic catheterization (both open surgical and percuta-
neous insertion techniques), and indwelling urethral catheter-ization are needed for patients who require long-term bladder
drainage.
Indications and limitations of condom catheter use.
External condom catheters are an effective alternative for blad-
der management in some men. Parallel studies involving pa-
tients at the same institution with condom catheters or in-
dwelling urethral catheters have suggested a lower incidence of
CA-bacteriuria among patients with condom catheters in most
[25, 190–193] but not all [194] studies. Studies suggest that
frequent manipulation of condom catheters increases the riskof CA-bacteriuria [192]. These impressions were conﬁrmed ina recent prospective, randomized trial involving 75 men at a
Veterans Affairs hospital with a maximum duration of follow-
up of 30 days [195]. Patients without dementia who had an
indwelling urethral catheter were ∼5 times as likely to develop
CA-bacteriuria, to develop CA-UTI, or to die as were thosepatients with appropriately-sized condom catheters (hazard ra-
tio, 4.84; 95% CI, 1.46–16.02; ). There was no statis- Pp.01
tically signiﬁcant difference in this outcome variable between
the condom and indwelling urethral catheterization groupsamong patients with dementia. The outcome variable was com-prised mostly of CA-bacteriuria, but the differences betweenthe condom and indwelling urethral catheterization groupswere not statistically signiﬁcant when CA-bacteriuria alone wasconsidered. Patients reported that condom catheters were morecomfortable ( ) and less painful ( ) than were Pp.02 Pp.02
indwelling catheters. There have been no prospective trials thathave compared condom catheterization and intermittent cath-eterization.
Thus, condom catheters appear to be associated with less
risk for CA-bacteriuria than short-term indwelling urethralcatheters in appropriately selected men with low postvoid re-sidual urine volume. There is no standard deﬁnition of ab-normal residual urine volume, because the association betweenresidual urine volume and UTI is not well established, althoughstudies often deﬁne abnormal retention as the presence of
1100
mL of urine on /H110912 consecutive occasions. Another potential
advantage is that condom catheters cause less urethral trauma,compared with that caused by indwelling urethral catheters.However, a condom catheter may not be an option in menwhose penis is small or whose skin is ulcerated. In addition,condom catheters can lead to penile skin breakdown and scarformation. Men with neurogenic bladders secondary to spinalcord injury should undergo urodynamic testing to assess thesafety of using a condom catheter, because assessment of thepostvoid residual may not be a reliable indicator of detrusor-sphincter dyssynergia, and long-term use of condom catheter-ization in the presence of dyssynergia may adversely affect renalfunction [196, 197].
There is currently no satisfactory external catheter suitable
for use by women.
Insertion Technique for Indwelling Urethral Catheter
Recommendations
24. Indwelling urethral catheters should be inserted using
aseptic technique and sterile equipment (B-III).
Evidence Summary
There are few data on the optimal level of sterility required toinsert an indwelling urinary catheter. Tambyah et al [80], in alarge prospective study involving catheterized patients, foundthat patients catheterized in the operating room had a lowerincidence of early CA-bacteriuria than did those catheterizedon the ward or in the emergency department (RR, 0.5; 95%CI, 0.2–1.0; ), which suggests that augmented barrier Pp.03
precautions at the time of insertion of a catheter may reducethe risk of early CA-bacteriuria. Other studies have also shownthat catheter insertion outside of the operating room is asso-ciated with a higher risk of CA-bacteriuria [198]. However, ina prospective trial conducted in the operating room, 156 pa-tients who were undergoing preoperative urethral catheteri-zation were randomly allocated to sterile (strict asepsis) orclean/nonsterile (hands washed with soap and water only, nogowns, nonsterile gloves, no catheter pack, cleansing of externalDownloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article/50/5/625/324341 by MUSC Library user on 12 November 2025

Urinary Catheter Guidelines •CID 2010:50 (1 March) •645genitalia with tap water only if visually unclean, and holding
the catheter within its plastic sheath at all times) techniquegroups [199]. There was no statistically signiﬁcant differencebetween the 2 groups with respect to the incidence of CA-bacteriuria, but the sterile method was more than twice asexpensive. Further support for the clean technique in insertingcatheters comes from observations of patients managed withintermittent catheterization who are catheterized multiple timesdaily and in whom there appears to be no difference in infectionrisk with clean versus sterile technique [162]. The Panel con-cluded, however, given the lack of data on CA-UTI as an out-come measure and the ubiquity of multidrug-resistant ﬂora inhealth care facilities, that the use of aseptic technique was pre-ferred at insertion of an indwelling urethral catheter, althoughfurther study is warranted. A study comparing clean and aseptictechniques might be especially relevant for patients with long-term catheterization in LTCFs.
PREVENTION STRATEGIES TO CONSIDER
AFTER CATHETER INSERTION
Closed Catheter System
Recommendations
25. A closed catheter drainage system, with ports in the distal
catheter for needle aspiration of urine, should be used to reduceCA-bacteriuria (A-II) and CA-UTI (A-III) in patients withshort-term indwelling urethral or suprapubic catheters and toreduce CA-bacteriuria (A-III) and CA-UTI (A-III) in patientswith long-term indwelling urethral or suprapubic catheters.
i. Institution-speciﬁc strategies should be developed to en-
sure that disconnection of the catheter junction is minimized(A-III) and that the drainage bag and connecting tube are al-ways kept below the level of the bladder (A-III).
26. Use of a preconnected system (catheter preattached to
the tubing of a closed drainage bag) may be considered toreduce CA-bacteriuria (C-II).
i. Data are insufﬁcient to make a recommendation as to
whether such a system reduces CA-UTI.
27. Use of a complex closed drainage system or application
of tape at the catheter-drainage tubing junction after catheterinsertion is not recommended to reduce CA-bacteriuria (A-I)or CA-UTI (A-III).
Evidence Summary
Introduction of the closed catheter drainage system, in whichthe collecting bag is attached to the distal end of the collectingtube, has been the most important infection prevention advancein CA-bacteriuria [4, 26, 200–202]. In noncomparative trials,use of closed drainage systems reduced the incidence of CA-bacteriuria to ∼50% at 14 days of continuous catheterization
[26], compared with an incidence of 95% among patients withcatheter drainage into an open container for 96 h [203]. Onthe basis of such historical comparisons, closed systems have
become the standard for bladder drainage. However, it is im-
portant that closed drainage systems remain closed, because
disconnections at the catheter-collecting tube junctions have
been shown to signiﬁcantly increase the risk of CA-bacteriuria
[46, 204].
Different methods to achieve closed drainage have been eval-
uated. In a randomized, controlled trial of 1494 catheter courses
in a group of 1476 hospitalized patients, bladder catheters with
preconnected drainage bags by sealed junctions were associated
with a lower risk of catheter junction disconnection and CA-
bacteriuria than were catheters without presealed junctions
[46]. The risk of CA-bacteriuria was 2.7 times higher prior to
receipt of antimicrobials for patients who were assigned un-
sealed catheters (95% CI, 1.3–5.4; ). Among the 220 Pp.007
patients who received no antimicrobials, there was a signiﬁcantassociation between mortality in the hospital and assignment
to the unsealed junction group (RR, 3.4; 95% CI, 1.1–10.7;
). However, a smaller randomized study involving 202 Pp.03
hospitalized men showed no difference in CA-bacteriuria rates
among patients with a preconnected system, compared with
patients for whom the catheter and drainage system were at-tached after insertion of the catheter [205]. Likewise, a ran-
domized trial involving 311 patients in an ICU reported that
the use of a complex closed drainage system (preattached cath-eter, antireﬂux valve, drip chamber, and povidone-iodine re-leasing cartridge) did not reduce the risk of CA-bacteriuria,compared with a simple 2-chamber closed system [206]. Finally,a large randomized study found that the use of a tape sealapplied to the catheter-drainage tubing junction within 24 hof catheter insertion, compared with no tape seal, was notassociated with statistically signiﬁcantly lower rates of CA-bac-teriuria among patients with short-term catheterization [207].
After contamination of the drainage bag, subsequent CA-
bacteriuria occurs in almost all patients who remain catheter-ized [14, 27]. Improper positioning of the drainage tube abovethe level of the bladder or below the level of the collection bagis a predictor for an increased risk of CA-bacteriuria [31].Indwelling catheters are usually anchored to minimize move-ment and urethral trauma, but it is not clear whether anchoringhelps to reduce CA-bacteriuria. However, in a prospective, ran-domized trial involving 118 adults with spinal cord injury, useof a securing device to reduce the motion of indwelling cath-eters, compared with standard methods for anchoring cathe-ters, was associated with a nonsigniﬁcant reduction in therate of CA-UTI (13% vs 24%; RR, 0.55; 95% CI, 0.25–1.22)[208]. Studies that address the impact of a closed system onthe risk of CA-bacteriuria or CA-UTI in patients with long-
term indwelling urethral or suprapubic catheters have notbeen reported.Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article/50/5/625/324341 by MUSC Library user on 12 November 2025

646 •CID 2010:50 (1 March) •Hooton et alAntimicrobial-Coated Catheters
Recommendations
28. In patients with short-term indwelling urethral cathe-
terization, antimicrobial (silver alloy or antibiotic)–coated uri-
nary catheters may be considered to reduce or delay the onsetof CA-bacteriuria (B-II).
i. Data are insufﬁcient to make a recommendation about
whether use of such catheters reduces CA-UTI in patients withshort-term indwelling urethral catheterization.
ii. Data are insufﬁcient to make a recommendation as to
whether use of such catheters reduces CA-bacteriuria or CA-UTI in patients with long-term catheterization.
Evidence Summary
In vitro studies have shown that antimicrobial-coated cathetershave antimicrobial effects against UTI pathogens [209–211].Antimicrobial-coated catheters have been developed to reducethe risk of CA-UTI by preventing or delaying the onset ofbacteriuria. A recent Cochrane review evaluated 23 randomizedand quasi-randomized trials that compared types of indwellingurinary catheters for short-term ( /H1108814 days) catheterization in
hospitalized adults [212]. Silver oxide catheters were not as-sociated with a statistically signiﬁcant reduction in CA-bacte-riuria; these catheters are no longer available. Silver alloy cath-eters were found to signiﬁcantly reduce the incidence ofCA-ASB in hospitalized adults catheterized for
!1 week (RR,
0.54; 95% CI, 0.43–0.67) and at 11 week (RR, 0.64; 95% CI,
0.51–0.80). Other meta-analyses of antimicrobial catheter trialshave also concluded that silver oxide–coated catheters lack ef-ﬁcacy and that silver alloy–coated catheters are protectiveagainst CA-bacteriuria [213–216].
These meta-analyses report consistent but variable evidence
that antimicrobial-coated catheters reduce CA-bacteriuria dur-ing short-term catheterization. Of note, however, the treatmenteffect observed with silver alloy–coated catheters is smaller inmore-recent studies than it is in earlier studies for reasons thatare not entirely clear, although more-recent studies were per-formed in more institutions, had more-diverse study popula-tions, and had lower background rates of CA-bacteriuria [213,214]. Moreover, concern has been raised that the purportedbeneﬁts of silver alloy may be attributable to the different cath-eters used in trials rather than to the silver alloy, in that siliconecatheters may have better properties than latex catheters, asnoted previously, and these catheters may be only minimallyimproved by the addition of silver alloy [66]. In this regard, arecent prospective, cross-over study that compared the efﬁcacyof a silicone-based, silver hydrogel–coated catheter with thatof a silicone-based, hydrogel-coated catheter in a group of 3036adult hospitalized patients found no factors, including silvercatheters, that were protective against CA-bacteriuria in a mul-tivariable survival analysis [65]. Potential cost savings with thesilver alloy catheters are suggested by a prospective cross-over
trial in which it was calculated that use of a silver alloy catheter
would lead to a cost reduction of 3.3%–35.5% [57] and by 2
economic modeling studies [217, 218], but it has been ques-
tioned whether some of the assumptions used in these analyses
are supported by data from more-recent trials [214].
The Cochrane review also evaluated trials performed with
antibiotic-impregnated catheters [212]. In the only trial of min-ocycline and rifampin-impregnated catheters [219], which was
conducted in a group of men after radical prostatectomy, coated
catheters, compared with standard catheters, were associated
with lower rates of CA-bacteriuria at
!1 week of catheterization
(RR, 0.36; 95% CI, 0.18–0.73) but not at 11 week [212]. Pa-
tients who were assigned to the minocycline and rifampin cath-
eter had signiﬁcantly lower rates of CA gram-positive bacte-riuria but did not have lower rates of CA gram-negative bacteriaor CA candiduria, compared with the control catheter group
[219]. One of 56 men in the minocycline-rifampin group had
a CA-UTI, compared with 6 of 68 men in the standard catheter
group (RR, 0.20; 95% CI, 0.03–1.63). In the 4 trials that com-
pared nitrofurazone-coated catheters with standard catheters,the nitrofurazone catheters were associated with lower rates of
CA-bacteriuria at
!1 week of catheterization (RR, 0.52; 95%
CI, 0.34–0.78), but the beneﬁt at 11 week was inconclusive
[212]. A recent randomized trial showed that use of nitrofura-
zone catheters led to signiﬁcantly fewer instances of new or
changed antimicrobial therapy and decreased rates of CA-bac-
teriuria [220]. In vitro studies suggest that nitrofurazone cath-
eters might have a more potent antibacterial effect than that
of silver hydrogel catheters [210].
Data on the effectiveness of antimicrobial-coated catheters
used in patients with long-term catheterization ( 130 days) were
assessed in another Cochrane review of randomized trials [221].
Only 1 trial of impregnated catheters was identiﬁed, which was
a randomized, controlled cross-over study in Japan involving
12 elderly patients and comparing a silver alloy catheter witha silicone catheter that reported a mean duration of interven-tion of 26 months. All patients developed CA-bacteriuria.
In summary, there is evidence from several trials that silver
alloy– and antibiotic-coated catheters, compared with standardcatheters, reduce the risk of CA-ASB in patients catheterizedfor short periods of time. However, the clinical beneﬁt of thesecatheters, especially regarding CA-UTI, morbidity, secondary
bloodstream infection, other health care–associated infections,
and cost savings have yet to be demonstrated in a randomized
trial with any of these devices and in any patient population[212, 214]. Moreover, the beneﬁt of the silver alloy–coatedcatheter in reducing CA-bacteriuria has been less impressive inmore-recent trials. No trial has yet directly compared antibiotic-coated versus silver alloy–coated catheters or one type of silveralloy–coated catheter versus another. Resistance developmentDownloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article/50/5/625/324341 by MUSC Library user on 12 November 2025

Urinary Catheter Guidelines •CID 2010:50 (1 March) •647to catheter antimicrobials has not been demonstrated in pub-
lished trials [212, 222], and it has been suggested that thelikelihood of antimicrobial resistance selection is likely to beconsiderably less than that with use of systemic antimicrobials[210]. However, possible resistance will remain a concern withthe antibiotic-coated catheters until it is appropriately ad-dressed in larger studies with adequate follow-up. Clearly, weneed more information on the role that silver-coated and an-tibiotic-coated catheters have in reducing CA-bacteriuria andclinical events.
Prophylaxis with Systemic Antimicrobials
Recommendations
29. Systemic antimicrobial prophylaxis should not be rou-
tinely used in patients with short-term (A-III) or long-term(A-II) catheterization, including patients who undergo surgicalprocedures, to reduce CA-bacteriuria or CA-UTI because ofconcern about selection of antimicrobial resistance.
Evidence Summary
Systemic antimicrobial drug therapy has been shown repeatedlyto lower the risk or to postpone the development of CA-bac-teriuria [14, 35, 198, 223–226]. In one such study of hospi-talized patients who underwent short-term catheterization, thebeneﬁcial effects of systemic antimicrobials on CA-bacteriuriawere noted during each of the ﬁrst 4 days after catheterization,but thereafter the rates of CA-bacteriuria were similar betweenthose who did and those who did not receive antimicrobials,and antimicrobial use selected for more-resistant ﬂora [14].Studies involving patients with short-term catheterization havemainly been conducted among postoperative patients, whereasstudies involving patients with long-term catheterization havelargely been conducted among LTCF residents [30].
In a recent Cochrane review of antimicrobial policies for
short-term ( /H1108814 days) catheterization in adult patients, ran-
domized, controlled trials involving patients who did and pa-tients who did not undergo surgical procedures were evaluated[227]. The Cochrane authors concluded that there was (1) weakevidence that antimicrobial prophylaxis reduced the rate of CA-UTI among women with abdominal surgery and a urethralcatheter for 24 h, (2) limited evidence that receiving antimi-crobial drugs during the ﬁrst 3 postoperative days or frompostoperative day 2 until catheter removal reduced the rate ofCA-bacteriuria among patients who underwent surgical pro-cedures with bladder drainage for at least 24 h after undergoingthe surgical procedure, and (3) limited evidence that prophy-lactic antimicrobials reduced CA-bacteriuria among patientswho did not undergo surgical procedures. In a randomizedplacebo-controlled trial, a single dose of trimethoprim-sulfa-methoxazole administered intravenously during the 30-min pe-riod preceding the surgical procedure in women undergoing
elective abdominal hysterectomy who had a urethral catheter
in place for 24 h resulted in a signiﬁcantly reduced rate of CA-
UTI 6 days after surgery, compared with placebo (RR, 0.20;
95% CI, 0.06–0.66) [228]. In another randomized, double-
blind, placebo-controlled trial of prophylactic ciproﬂoxacin in
patients who underwent surgical procedures who had post-operative bladder drainage scheduled to last for 3–14 days, 75%
of patients in the placebo group had CA-bacteriuria at catheter
removal, compared with 16% of ciproﬂoxacin-treated patients
(RR, 4.7; 95% CI, 3.0–7.4) [229]. Twenty percent of patients
who received placebo had CA-UTI, including 3 patients with
septicemia, compared with 5% of the patients who received
ciproﬂoxacin (RR, 4.0; 95% CI, 1.6–10.2) [229]. The Cochrane
authors raised concerns that adverse drug reactions and selec-tion for antimicrobial resistance associated with antimicrobialprophylaxis had not been adequately addressed in the trials that
they reviewed [227].
Several studies have examined systemic antimicrobials in the
prevention of CA-bacteriuria or CA-UTI among patients with
long-term catheterization [112, 161, 230, 231]. A recent Coch-rane review evaluated all randomized and quasi-randomized
trials that compared antimicrobial prophylaxis policies for
adults and children catheterized for
114 days [231]. One ran-
domized, double-blind, cross-over trial involving 34 elderly
nursing home patients with indwelling catheters compared pro-
phylaxis with norﬂoxacin versus placebo [232]. Norﬂoxacin
prophylaxis was associated with statistically signiﬁcant reduc-
tions in gram-negative isolates ( ), CA-UTI (1 in 276 P!.005
catheterization weeks vs 12 in 259 weeks; ), and CA P!.02
encrustations and blockage ( ). However, at the end of P!.05
the prophylaxis period, 25% of strains in patients who received
placebo, compared with 90% of strains among patients who
received norﬂoxacin, were resistant to norﬂoxacin. Four other
trials that involved adult patients with neurogenic bladders
managed with intermittent catheterization were identiﬁed that
compared antimicrobial prophylaxis with administration of an-
timicrobials when microbiologically indicated [231, 233–236].The antimicrobials studied were nitrofurantoin and trimeth-oprim-sulfamethoxazole. All 4 trials consistently showed a re-
duction in the rate of CA-bacteriuria. In 1 trial, at least 1
episode of CA-UTI (bacteriuria and fever and at least 1 classical
manifestation of UTI) occurred in 4 of 57 trimethoprim-sul-famethoxazole–treated men, compared with 18 of 52 placebo-treated men ( ) [236]. Among episodes of CA-bacteri- P
!.001
uria that occurred during follow-up, 95% of isolates from thetreatment group were resistant to trimethoprim-sulfamethox-
azole, compared with 51% of isolates from the placebo group.
An earlier review of controlled trials of antimicrobial pro-
phylaxis (mainly with nitrofurantoin, trimethoprim-sulfameth-oxazole, or methenamine) involving adolescents and adultsDownloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article/50/5/625/324341 by MUSC Library user on 12 November 2025

648 •CID 2010:50 (1 March) •Hooton et alwith spinal cord injury [230] showed that prophylaxis signif-
icantly reduced CA-ASB among patients !90 days after spinal
cord injury (pooled difference, /H110020.27; 95% CI, /H110020.40 to/H110020.15;
) but that the association was weaker in those who had P!.05
been injured for 190 days ( ). There was no statistically Pp.06
signiﬁcant reduction in CA-UTI. In patients who received an-timicrobial drugs other than methenamine, there was a 2-foldincrease in the proportion of antimicrobial-resistant bacteriacultured from patients.
Although systemic antimicrobial agents reduce or delay the
onset of CA-bacteriuria and CA-UTI, authorities discouragetheir routine use in catheterized persons because of the cost,the potential for adverse effects, and the potential for the de-velopment of antimicrobial resistance [14, 16, 30, 32]. For thesame reasons, the Panel’s recommendation not to use systemicantimicrobial prophylaxis in catheterized patients applies topatients who undergo surgical procedures and have short-termindwelling catheterization, even though systemic prophylaxishas been shown to reduce CA-bacteriuria and CA-UTI in suchpatients in randomized, controlled trials. Thus, the quality ofevidence supporting the recommendation not to use prophy-laxis in patients with short-term catheterization is based onopinion rather than trial data.
Some authorities have suggested a possible role for systemic
antimicrobial prophylaxis in patients with short-term cathe-terization at high risk for serious complications if UTI occurs,such as patients who are granulocytopenic, who undergo urol-ogic or gynecologic surgical procedures, or who undergo asurgical procedure involving a foreign body [16, 31, 47, 83,237]. However, no studies of prophylactic antimicrobials havebeen performed that involve catheterized persons in these high-risk groups. Of note, studies have shown that up to 80% ofhospitalized patients with an indwelling catheter receive anti-microbial therapy for some indication [26, 226]. Moreover,most patients who undergo surgical procedures receive at leasta short duration of antimicrobial prophylaxis.
Prophylaxis with Methenamine Salts
Recommendations
30. Methenamine salts should not be used routinely to re-
duce CA-bacteriuria or CA-UTI in patients with long-termintermittent (A-II) or long-term indwelling urethral or supra-pubic (A-III) catheterization.
i. Data are insufﬁcient to make a recommendation about
the use of methenamine salts to reduce CA-UTI in patientswith condom catheterization.
31. Methenamine salts may be considered for the reduction
of CA-bacteriuria and CA-UTI in patients after a gynecologicsurgical procedure who are catheterized for no more than 1week (C-I). It is reasonable to assume that a similar effect wouldbe seen after other types of surgical procedures.i. Data are insufﬁcient to make recommendations about
whether one methenamine salt is superior to another.
32. When using a methenamine salt to reduce CA-UTI, the
urinary pH should be maintained below 6.0 (B-III).
i. Data are insufﬁcient to recommend how best to achieve
a low urinary pH.
Evidence Summary
Methenamine salts (methenamine mandelate and methena-
mine hippurate) have been used for the suppression and pre-
vention of UTI for years, although their use is limited because
of doubts about their effectiveness and the availability of many
other effective urinary antimicrobials. The main advantage to
their use is their lack of selection for resistant organisms. Meth-
enamine salts are hydrolyzed to ammonia and formaldehyde,
a denaturant of proteins and nucleic acids responsible for theantibacterial activity of methenamine. Antimicrobial activity in
urine is correlated with urinary concentrations of formalde-
hyde, which has a broad spectrum of activity against urinary
pathogens [238], and the urinary concentration of formalde-
hyde is dependent on the concentration of methenamine in the
urine, the urine pH, and the time the drug remains in thebladder [239, 240]. However, the association between formal-
dehyde concentration and urinary pH has not been conﬁrmed
consistently [238, 241], and ascorbic acid may increase urinary
formaldehyde concentrations with only slight changes in uri-
nary pH [242]. Maintaining urinary pH below 6 or even below5.5 is thought to be necessary to achieve bactericidal concen-
trations of formaldehyde [240]. Studies of ascorbic acid in dos-
ages of up to 4 g per day have shown no signiﬁcant effect on
mean urinary pH [243–245], and dosages as high as 12 g perday or more frequent administration (eg, every 4 h) may be
required to adequately acidify the urine [238]. Ammonium
chloride might be more effective in acidifying the urine, but
the potential for metabolic acidosis is a concern [244].
Methenamine is generally considered to have limited effec-
tiveness in catheterized patients for whom the dwell time, and
thus the time for hydrolysis to formaldehyde, is limited [238].
In a double-blind, randomized, controlled trial involving 305
community-dwelling patients with spinal cord injury with neu-
rogenic bladder and stable bladder management (indwellingurethral or suprapubic catheterization [51%], clean intermit-tent catheterization [30%], or reﬂex voiding [19%]), methena-
mine hippurate administered at a dosage of 1 g twice daily did
not result in a signiﬁcantly longer CA-UTI–free period, com-
pared with placebo (hazard ratio, 0.96; 95% CI, 0.68–1.35),irrespective of bladder management [246]. Of note, 73% ofpatients in the methenamine group and 55% of patients in theplacebo group were bacteriuric at enrollment. A randomizedstudy involving men with spinal cord injury who underwentintermittent catheterization and whose urine was rendered ster-Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article/50/5/625/324341 by MUSC Library user on 12 November 2025

Urinary Catheter Guidelines •CID 2010:50 (1 March) •649ile with antimicrobials before enrollment reported that pro-
phylactic use of methenamine was not beneﬁcial in preventing
CA-bacteriuria [247]. On the other hand, in a double-blind,
randomized, placebo-controlled trial involving 39 nonbacteri-
uric hospitalized patients with neurogenic bladders who un-
derwent intermittent catheterization and bladder retraining,
methenamine mandelate with ammonium chloride (1 g every6 h for both drugs) reduced the CA-ASB rate over a 3-week
period, compared with placebo (9 [53%] of 17 vs 19 [86%] of
22; ) [248].P
!.02
A recent Cochrane review [249] of randomized, controlled
studies of methenamine hippurate for prevention of UTI in-
cluded 4 studies involving patients who underwent short-term
catheterization for /H110887 days after a gynecologic surgical pro-
cedure (eg, uterovaginal prolapse or vaginal plastic surgery).
CA-UTI was signiﬁcantly reduced in the methenamine group,compared with the control group, in the 3 trials that reported
this outcome (RR, 0.14; 95% CI, 0.05–0.38), and CA-bacteri-
uria was signiﬁcantly reduced in all 4 trials (RR, 0.48; 95% CI,
0.23–0.99) [250–253]. For example, in a prospective, random-
ized, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial involving 145 pa-tients who underwent gynecologic surgical procedures, CA-
bacteriuria and CA-UTI were less common soon after surgery
in the methenamine group, compared with the placebo group
(rate of CA-bacteriuria, 30% vs 50%; ; rate of CA-UTI, Pp.02
2.7% vs 13.9%; ) [251]. Of note, methenamine was Pp.03
administered for several days after the catheters had been re-moved, which may help to explain its effectiveness.
In summary, the data are unconvincing that methenamine
is effective in reducing the risk of CA-bacteriuria or CA-UTIin patients managed with long-term indwelling urethral cath-
eterization, probably because there is insufﬁcient time in the
bladder to achieve adequate concentrations of formaldehyde to
be clinically effective [30, 238, 241], and its routine use in such
patients should be discouraged. Although the data are mixed,
methenamine also does not appear to be effective in patients
with intermittent catheterization. On the other hand, methen-
amine is effective in patients after gynecologic surgical pro-
cedures who undergo short-term catheterization, althoughthis group experiences limited morbidity from CA-bacteriuria.
There are no published data on the use of methenamine in
men who use condom catheters. Methenamine is likely to be
most effective in situations in which the urine pH is low andthere is time for hydrolysis of methenamine to achieve sufﬁcientconcentrations of formaldehyde. It may be reasonable to con-
sider a trial of methenamine involving selected patients with
intermittent catheterization who have frequent recurrent epi-
sodes of CA-UTI, even though the beneﬁt of methenamine in
such patients is unproven. If used, the manufacturers’ rec-ommended dosage is 1 g twice daily for methenamine hippurateand 1 g 4 times daily for methenamine mandelate. However,concentrations achieved with methenamine hippurate dosed at12 h may be suboptimal [254]. It is reasonable to try to reducethe urinary pH below 6.0 when using methenamine, but theoptimal method to achieve low urinary pH is not known.
Prophylaxis with Cranberry Products
Recommendations
33. Cranberry products should not be used routinely to re-
duce CA-bacteriuria or CA-UTI in patients with neurogenicbladders managed with intermittent or indwelling catheteri-zation (A-II).
i. Data are insufﬁcient to make a recommendation on the
use of cranberry products to reduce CA-bacteriuria or CA-UTIin other groups of catheterized patients, including those usingcondom catheters.
Evidence Summary
Cranberry products are used widely in different patient pop-ulations to reduce UTI. A recent Cochrane review of random-ized, controlled trials concluded that there is some evidencethat cranberry may be effective in reducing symptomatic UTIsin young women with recurrent UTIs, but effectiveness forother groups, including elderly men and women or peoplerequiring catheterization, is uncertain [255]. Only 2 double-blinded, placebo-controlled studies of cranberry for the pre-vention of CA-UTI in adults with spinal cord injury were iden-tiﬁed [256, 257]. Both of these small studies enrolled outpa-tients managed with various bladder drainage methods; subjectsin one study were bacteriuric [257], and the other study didnot provide data on whether patients were bacteriuric [256].No beneﬁcial effect of cranberry was found on CA-bacteriuria[256, 257] or CA-UTI [257]. Two trials have been publishedsince this review. In a double-blind, factorial-design, random-ized, controlled trial involving 305 community-dwelling spinalcord injury patients with neurogenic bladder and stable bladdermanagement, almost two-thirds of whom were bacteriuric atenrollment, no signiﬁcant beneﬁt was seen from cranberry (800mg twice daily) in the CA-UTI–free period, compared withplacebo [246]. However, in a more recent randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial with a cross-over design, 47 menwith spinal cord injury and neurogenic bladder who used con-dom catheters (74%), intermittent catheterization (17%), orindwelling catheterization (9%) received 6 months of cranberryextract (a 500-mg tablet) or placebo [258]. During the cran-berry period, 6 subjects experienced 7 CA-UTIs, compared with16 subjects who experienced 21 CA-UTIs in the placebo period( for both number of subjects and incidence). There wasP
!.05
no difference in the CA-ASB rate between the 2 groups, butthe authors do not state what proportion of patients were bac-teriuric at the start of the trial.
Thus, the data on effectiveness of cranberry in preventingDownloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article/50/5/625/324341 by MUSC Library user on 12 November 2025

650 •CID 2010:50 (1 March) •Hooton et alCA-bacteriuria or CA-UTI in patients with neurogenic bladders
are mostly negative, but the quality of the studies is poor. Inthe Hess trial [258], which was the only 1 of 4 trials thatinvolved patients with neurogenic bladders to show positiveresults, most patients were using condom catheterization. Rou-tine use of cranberry should be discouraged in patients withneurogenic bladders who require catheterization because of thelack of clearly demonstrated efﬁcacy in preventing CA-UTI,problems with tolerance associated with long-term use, andcost. However, it may be reasonable to consider a trial use ofcranberry in men who use condom catheterization who haverecurrent episodes of CA-UTI.
There are no published data on the use of cranberry products
for the prevention of CA-bacteriuria or CA-UTI in catheterizedadults without neurogenic bladder.
Enhanced Meatal Care
Recommendations
34. Daily meatal cleansing with povidone-iodine solution,
silver sulfadiazine, polyantibiotic ointment or cream, or greensoap and water is not recommended for routine use in menor women with indwelling urethral catheters to reduce CA-bacteriuria (A-I).
i. Data are insufﬁcient to make a recommendation as to
whether meatal cleansing reduces the risk of CA-UTI.
Evidence Summary
Bacteria causing CA-bacteriuria in closed catheter systems pre-dominantly enter the bladder along the catheter-urethral in-terface [34, 80]. Thus, reducing meatal colonization would seemto be a reasonable measure to reduce the risk of CA-UTI.However, results of large randomized trials have shown nobeneﬁt to meatal cleansing with either green soap or applicationof antimicrobials in men or women [259, 260]. In a trial thatevaluated 2 interventions, twice-daily application of a povi-done-iodine solution and ointment to the urethral meatus-catheter interface and once-daily meatal cleansing with a non-antiseptic solution of green soap and water were compared withusual care (debris removal at daily baths) [259]. CA-bacteriuriarates were higher in both treated groups, compared with ratesin the untreated groups. In addition, a subset of high-riskwomen in each treatment group had signiﬁcantly increasedrates of CA-bacteriuria. In other trials, meatal care with polyan-tibiotic ointment or cream applied twice or 3 times daily, re-spectively, was not statistically signiﬁcantly better than usualcare in preventing CA-bacteriuria, although application of thepolyantibiotic ointment showed signiﬁcant beneﬁt in a subsetof high-risk women [29, 260]. Silver sulfadiazine 1% creamapplied twice daily to the meatus was also found to be inef-fective in preventing CA-bacteriuria, compared with usual care[33]. Another randomized, controlled trial was performed toassess whether simultaneous interventions to block the 3 po-tential sites of bacterial entry—namely, the urethral insertionsite, the catheter drainage tube junction, and the outﬂow tubeof the drainage bag—was beneﬁcial. The interventions includeddaily catheter care, use of a preconnected sealed catheter system,and disinfection of the outﬂow tube of the drainage bag withpovidone-iodine [29]. Among treated patients, 14 (4.7%) of300 acquired CA-bacteriuria, compared with 15 (4.9%) of 306who did not receive the protocol interventions. The authorsconcluded that the use of these simultaneous measures to re-duce CA-bacteriuria was not effective and was more expensivethan usual care.
Possible reasons why meatal care has not been effective in
reducing CA-bacteriuria include the negative effect of increasedcatheter manipulation, inadequate residual antiseptic activityof the topical agent, lack of effect on the intraluminal route ofinfection, and the possible development of protective bioﬁlmsat the catheter-urethra interface [33, 259, 261].
Catheter Irrigation
Recommendations
35. Catheter irrigation with antimicrobials should not be
used routinely to reduce or eradicate CA-bacteriuria (A-I) orCA-UTI (A-II) in patients with indwelling catheters.
36. Catheter irrigation with antimicrobials may be consid-
ered in selected patients who undergo surgical procedures andshort-term catheterization to reduce CA-bacteriuria (C-I).
i. Data are insufﬁcient to make a recommendation about
whether bladder irrigation in such patients reduces CA-UTI.
37. Catheter irrigation with normal saline should not be
used routinely to reduce CA-bacteriuria, CA-UTI, or obstruc-tion in patients with long-term indwelling catheterization (B-II).
Evidence Summary
Periodic catheter irrigation is intended to prevent catheter ob-struction and infection, but little overall beneﬁt has been seenin studies with closed systems [262]. Agents used for contin-uous or intermittent bladder irrigation include antiseptics (po-vidone-iodine or chlorhexidine digluconate) and antibiotics(neomycin or polymyxin B sulfate) [30]. Warren et al [204]randomized 187 nonbacteriuric adult patients who requiredshort-term urinary catheterization to closed drainage with atriple-lumen, neomycin-polymyxin irrigated system or a dou-ble-lumen nonirrigated catheter system. There was no signiﬁ-cant difference in the proportion (16% vs 18%, respectively)or in the cumulative prevalence of CA-bacteriuria between the2 groups, but uropathogens in the irrigation group were sig-niﬁcantly more resistant to the irrigating antibiotic than werethose in the other group. In a prospective randomized trialinvolving 52 elderly men and women without neurogenic blad-Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article/50/5/625/324341 by MUSC Library user on 12 November 2025

Urinary Catheter Guidelines •CID 2010:50 (1 March) •651ders who were managed with indwelling urinary catheters,
twice-daily bladder instillation of chlorhexidine had no effect,
compared with normal saline, on CA-bacteriuria (all patients
were bacteriuric, and colony counts did not drop in either
group) or CA-UTI [263]. Likewise, in a randomized double-
blind study of 89 community-residing persons with neurogenic
bladders with indwelling catheters and CA-bacteriuria, therewas no effect on levels of CA-bacteriuria from twice-daily blad-
der irrigation with neomycin-polymyxin or acetic acid versus
sterile saline [264].
On the other hand, bladder irrigation with antiseptics has
been effective in preventing CA-bacteriuria in some studies
involving patients who undergo surgical procedures and have
short-term catheterization. In a randomized, controlled study
of 57 orthopedic patients who underwent single or short-termintermittent urethral catheterization, bladder irrigation aftereach catheterization with povidone-iodine, compared with no
irrigation, reduced the percentage of patients who developed
CA-bacteriuria to 4%, compared with 28% in the control group
( ) [265]. In a randomized, controlled study of 89 menPp.03
who underwent transurethral operations, postoperative bladderirrigation with chlorhexidine reduced the percentage of patients
with postoperative CA-bacteriuria to 12.8%, compared with
36.7% of saline control group patients ( ) [266]. In a pre- P
!.02
post study involving 156 consecutive patients with an indwell-ing catheter and bacteriuria who underwent open prostatec-
tomy with preoperative bladder washing with povidone-iodine,
compared with no irrigation, the rate of postoperative CA-
bacteriuria remained unchanged in the control group (100%)but was reduced to 22.5% in the treated group ( ) Pp.001
[267].
Catheter blockage can result from encrustation formed by
urease-producing organisms in the catheter bioﬁlm. In 1135
weekly urine specimens from 32 patients with long-term cath-
eterization, 86% had urease-positive bacterial species at /H1109110
5
cfu/mL; P. mirabilis , but no other urease-positive species, was
signiﬁcantly associated with the 67 obstructions observed in 23
patients [268]. Patients with blocked catheters are more oftencolonized with P. mirabilis and P. stuartii than are patients
without blocked catheters [93]. In a randomized cross-over trial
involving 32 women with long-term catheterization and bac-
teriuria in whom 10 weeks of once-daily normal saline irri-
gation was compared with 10 weeks of no irrigation, the prev-alence and species of CA-bacteriuria and the incidence ofcatheter obstructions and febrile episodes, including those that
appeared to be of urinary origin (ie, CA-UTIs), were similar
[269].
These data suggest that catheter irrigation is not effective in
preventing or eradicating CA-bacteriuria in patients with in-
dwelling catheterization but may reduce CA-bacteriuria in se-lected surgical populations who undergo short-term catheter-ization. However, catheter irrigation is time consuming, andsome studies, at least those with long-term use of antimicrobialirrigating solutions, have shown that irrigation may promoteinfection due to organisms that are resistant to the antimicro-bials. Routine bladder irrigation may also cause irritation ofthe bladder mucosa [270].
Antimicrobials in the Drainage Bag
Recommendations
38. Routine addition of antimicrobials or antiseptics to the
drainage bag of catheterized patients should not be used toreduce CA-bacteriuria (A-I) or CA-UTI (A-I).
Evidence Summary
Both animal and human studies have demonstrated that CA-bacteriuria rapidly follows entrance of bacteria into the drainagebag [14, 27, 82]. Studies have also shown that as many as 34%–42% of CA-bacteriuria episodes originated from an intralu-minal source [80, 271]. Raising the drainage bag above the levelof the bladder or collecting tube will facilitate this.
Randomized trials of the addition of antimicrobials (includ-
ing chlorhexidine, hydrogen peroxide, povidone-iodine, orslowly released silver ions) to the drainage bag to decrease therisk of CA-bacteriuria have generally shown no beneﬁt [29,150, 272–274]. For example, in 668 patients with indwellingurethral catheters (mean duration, 4 days), there was no dif-ference between the hydrogen peroxide group and the controlgroup with respect to the mean duration of catheterizationbefore the onset of bacteriuria, the rate of CA-bacteriuria, orthe spectrum of etiologic agents recovered [150]. However, bagcontamination with the same organism responsible for bacte-riuria preceded infection in only 5 (7%) of the 68 patients whodeveloped bacteriuria, which suggests that infections arisingintraluminally from contamination of the drainage bag are un-common among catheterized patients in some general hospitalsettings. An intraluminal source of infection may be more com-mon among patients catheterized for longer periods of time[201], but CA-bacteriuria or CA-UTI rates were not reducedwith bag disinfection with hydrogen peroxide in a randomizedtrial involving 134 patients catheterized for /H110915 days (mean
duration, 9.6 days) [272].
The evidence strongly suggests that bag disinfection does not
result in reduced risk of CA-bacteriuria or CA-UTI. Adherenceto the closed drainage system minimizes the importance of thedrainage bag as the source of CA-bacteriuria and thus the use-fulness of drainage bag disinfection [273]. Because of the po-tential role of contaminated drainage bags in infection clusters[58, 63], it may be appropriate to consider drainage bag dis-infection as an infection prevention measure during nosocomialoutbreaks [275, 276], but this has not been evaluated in ran-domized trials.Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article/50/5/625/324341 by MUSC Library user on 12 November 2025

652 •CID 2010:50 (1 March) •Hooton et alRoutine Catheter Change
Recommendations
39. Data are insufﬁcient to make a recommendation as to
whether routine catheter change (eg, every 2–4 weeks) in pa-
tients with functional long-term indwelling urethral or supra-pubic catheters reduces the risk of CA-ASB or CA-UTI, evenin patients who experience repeated early catheter blockagefrom encrustation.
Evidence Summary
Urinary catheters readily develop bioﬁlms on their inner andouter surfaces once they are inserted [32]. Established bioﬁlmsinherently protect uropathogens from antimicrobials and thehost immune response. Many species decrease substantially inprevalence when paired indwelling urethral catheter urine cul-tures and replacement catheter urine cultures are compared,especially for patients with long-term catheterization [89–91].Catheters are often changed routinely at periodic intervals (eg,monthly) to reduce the risk of CA-bacteriuria or obstruction,but this practice is not evidence-based. It has also been rec-ommended that the subgroup of patients who experience re-peated early catheter blockage should have their catheterschanged every 7–10 days to avoid obstruction, but this inter-vention has also not been evaluated in clinical trials [92]. Thecommon practice of routine periodic change of indwelling uri-nary catheters to prevent CA-bacteriuria and obstruction war-rants study.
Prophylactic Antimicrobials at Time of Catheter Removal
or Replacement
Recommendations
40. Prophylactic antimicrobials, given systemically or by
bladder irrigation, should not be administered routinely to pa-
tients at the time of catheter placement to reduce CA-UTI (A-I) or at the time of catheter removal (B-I) or replacement (A-III) to reduce CA-bacteriuria.
i. Data are insufﬁcient to make a recommendation as to
whether administration of prophylactic antimicrobials to suchpatients reduces bacteremia.
Evidence Summary
Fever and/or bacteremia can occur at the time of removal orreplacement of a urethral catheter in a patient with CA-bac-teriuria. In addition, CA-bacteriuria can occur after a catheterhas been removed, although the frequency with which thishappens is not known. Prophylactic antimicrobials are some-times used to prevent such events. In a questionnaire study ofhealth care professionals in England, 60% advocated the useof antimicrobials for either all or selected groups of patients atthe time of removal of a urethral catheter, citing concerns aboutthe potential for bacteremia, infection in a prosthesis, or UTI[277]. In a study describing catheterized and bacteriuric womenin LTCFs, Warren et al [28] reported an incidence of 2.1 cases
of fever per 100 resident-days that occurred within 24 h of
catheter replacement, compared with 1.1 cases of fever per 100
resident-days that did not occur within 24 h of catheter re-
placement. The episodes of fever that occurred within 24 h of
catheter replacement generally resolved promptly, even without
antibacterial therapy.
Several studies evaluating the risk of bacteremia associated
with catheter removal or replacement have been performed. In
a study describing 115 men and women with long-term cath-
eterization (most patients did not have a neurogenic bladder)
who were bacteriuric and living at home, Jewes et al [73] re-
ported bacteremia after 20 (10%) of 197 urethral catheter
changes and 1 (5%) of 19 suprapubic catheter changes. All
bacteremic episodes were asymptomatic, and patients wereafebrile. Other prospective studies in geriatric populations withlong-term catheterization and bacteriuria have found a ∼4%
rate of transient bacteremia among patients who had removal
or replacement of their indwelling catheters, and none of the
patients were clinically symptomatic [74, 75].
Studies have evaluated the effectiveness of antimicrobial pro-
phylaxis in preventing CA-bacteriuria in patients who are hav-ing a catheter placed or removed. In a randomized double-
blind, placebo-controlled trial involving 162 elderly hospitalized
patients who needed indwelling urethral catheterization, single-
dose aztreonam versus placebo administered 3 h before cath-
eterization resulted in no CA-UTIs at 7 days in 89% of the
patients in the aztreonam group and 46% of the patients in
the placebo group [278]. Concerns about this study include
the unexpectedly high rates of CA-UTI during the ﬁrst week
of catheterization, short follow-up, and the absence of data onantimicrobial resistance in infection episodes. In another ran-
domized, double-blind, placebo-controlled study involving 48
patients across specialties with a urethral catheter in situ for
2–7 days, patients (15% with CA-bacteriuria) assigned to a 48-
h course of either ciproﬂoxacin or placebo tablets starting 2 hbefore catheter removal reported no difference in the rates ofCA-bacteriuria by 2 weeks after removing the urethral catheter
(16% vs 13%) [279]. Likewise, in a randomized, controlled trial
involving 264 catheterized patients (14% with CA-bacteriuria)
on a urological ward whose catheters were being removed, blad-der irrigation with povidone-iodine before catheter removal,compared with no irrigation, showed no beneﬁt with respect
to subsequent CA-bacteriuria rates (47 [18%] of 264 patients
vs 52 [22%] of 233 patients) [280]. On the other hand, a more
recent prospective, randomized, nonblinded trial involving 239patients who underwent elective abdominal surgical proceduresin which patients were randomized to 3 doses of trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole or no treatment at urinary catheter removalshowed signiﬁcantly fewer CA-UTIs (4.9% vs 21.6%; ) P
!.001
and fewer cases of CA-bacteriuria (16.5% vs 41.2%; ) P!.001Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article/50/5/625/324341 by MUSC Library user on 12 November 2025

Urinary Catheter Guidelines •CID 2010:50 (1 March) •653in the treatment group [281]. There are no published studies
of the efﬁcacy of prophylactic antimicrobials in preventing CA-bacteriuria or CA-UTI in patients whose catheters are beingreplaced or in preventing bacteremia in patients whose cathetersare being removed or replaced.
On the basis of these observations and concerns about in-
creasing antimicrobial resistance, prophylactic antimicrobialsare not routinely recommended for catheter placement, re-moval, or replacement. This recommendation is also supportedby the low rate of serious complications among the large num-ber of patients who undergo long-term intermittent catheter-ization with clean technique in the setting of chronic bacteri-uria. However, this is an area that warrants further study, giventhe ﬁndings reported above.
III. IN CATHETERIZED PATIENTS WITH ASB,
WHAT IS THE APPROPRIATE MANAGEMENTTO REDUCE THE RISK OF CA-UTI?
Screening for and Treatment of CA-ASB in Catheterized
Patients to Reduce CA-UTI
Recommendations
41. Screening for and treatment of CA-ASB are not rec-
ommended to reduce subsequent CA-bacteriuria or CA-UTI
in patients with short-term (A-II) or long-term (A-I) indwellingurethral catheters.
42. Screening for and treatment of CA-ASB are not rec-
ommended to reduce subsequent CA-bacteriuria or CA-UTIin patients with neurogenic bladders managed with intermittentcatheterization (A-II).
43. Screening for and treatment of CA-ASB are not rec-
ommended to reduce subsequent CA-bacteriuria or CA-UTIin other catheterized patients (A-III), except in pregnantwomen (A-III) and patients who undergo urologic proceduresfor which visible mucosal bleeding is anticipated (A-III).
Evidence Summary
The recommendations and supporting data for screening forand treatment of CA-ASB in catheterized patients were pre-viously published in the IDSA guidelines for the diagnosis andtreatment of ASB in 2005 [105]. T o summarize, patients withshort-term indwelling catheters in acute care facilities oftenreceive antimicrobial therapy, usually for an indication otherthan UTI [26, 224, 226], which complicates assessment of out-comes unique to treatment of CA-ASB. However, complicationsof CA-ASB in patients with short-term catheterization are rare,as shown in a large prospective cohort study of CA-bacteriuria[40]. In a prospective randomized trial in a medical-surgicalICU, 60 patients who had an indwelling urethral catheter for
148 h and developed CA-ASB were randomized to receive ei-
ther a 3-day course of antimicrobials associated with the re-placement of the indwelling urethral catheter or no antimicro-bials and no catheter replacement [282]. There were no
statistically signiﬁcant differences between the 2 groups with
respect to the subsequent occurrence of urosepsis or CA-bac-
teriuria. Furthermore, in a case-control study that involved
hospitalized patients and showed that CA-bacteriuria was as-
sociated with increased mortality, multivariate analysis dem-
onstrated that antimicrobial therapy did not alter the associ-ation with mortality [4].
Residents in LTCFs frequently receive antimicrobials for ASB.
For these residents, the ordering of urine cultures and pre-
scribing of antimicrobials is inﬂuenced by a wide range ofnonspeciﬁc symptoms and signs, and nurses play a central role
in both the ordering of urine cultures and the decision as to
whether antimicrobials are prescribed [115]. A prospective, ran-
domized trial of cephalexin or no antimicrobial therapy forepisodes of CA-ASB caused by susceptible organisms, con-
ducted among 35 patients with long-term catheterization, re-
ported no differences between the 2 groups in incidence or
prevalence of CA-bacteriuria, CA-UTI, or obstructed catheters
in patients who were followed up for 12–44 weeks [283]. Al-
though rates of reinfection were similar, 47% of reinfecting
organisms in the cephalexin group but only 26% of reinfectingorganisms in the control group were highly resistant to ceph-
alexin. In a pre-post noncomparative study of consecutive
courses of different antimicrobials to eradicate bacteriuria
among elderly hospitalized patients, most of whom had in-
dwelling catheters, there was no decrease in the number of
episodes of fever, compared with the pretreatment period, and
when bacteriuria was eliminated, replacement by antimicrobial-
resistant strains was common [284].
Screening for and treatment of CA-ASB in patients with
spinal cord injury are also not beneﬁcial [105]. Treatment ofCA-ASB is followed by early recurrence with more-resistant
strains in catheter-free patients with spinal cord injury [285],
has no effect on the rate of subsequent CA-ASB or CA-UTI
among patients managed by intermittent catheterization [235,286], and when CA-UTIs do occur, they respond promptly totreatment [287]. Although there are limited clinical trials, and
although interpretation is compromised by relatively short fol-
low-up periods and small study numbers, review articles [288]
and consensus guidelines [98] uniformly recommend that onlyCA-UTI should be treated in patients with spinal cord injury.
In summary, patients with short-term and long-term cath-
eterization with CA-ASB have a low rate of complications, and
treatment is not beneﬁcial in reducing subsequent CA-bacte-
riuria or CA-UTI, although it does lead to selection of anti-microbial-resistant uropathogens. One exception is pregnantwomen; randomized, controlled treatment trials involving non-catheterized women have shown that eradication of ASB re-duces the risk of pyelonephritis and adverse consequences ofpregnancy [105]. There are no CA-ASB treatment trials in-Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article/50/5/625/324341 by MUSC Library user on 12 November 2025

654 •CID 2010:50 (1 March) •Hooton et alvolving pregnant catheterized women. Another exception is
patients with CA-ASB who undergo traumatic genitourinaryprocedures associated with mucosal bleeding, for whom studieshave shown a high rate of postprocedure bacteremia and sepsis[105]. Avoiding inappropriate treatment of CA-ASB in adultsshould reduce the risk of development of antimicrobial resis-tance and is consistent with the IDSA [105] and US PreventiveServices Task Force [289, 290] guidelines on bacteriuria. A pro-posal has been made that a hospital and ambulatory perfor-mance measure should be developed for not treating ASB inadults [291].
Screening for and Treatment of CA-ASB at Catheter Removal
to Reduce CA-UTI
Recommendations
44. Antimicrobial treatment of CA-ASB that persists 48 h
after short-term indwelling catheter removal in women may be
considered to reduce the risk of subsequent CA-UTI (C-I).
i. Data are insufﬁcient, however, to make a recommen-
dation as to whether all women should be uniformly screenedfor CA-ASB at catheter removal.
ii. Data are insufﬁcient to make a recommendation about
screening for or treatment of persistent CA-ASB in men.
Evidence Summary
A prospective, randomized, placebo-controlled trial of anti-microbial treatment of CA-ASB persisting at 48 h after short-term catheter removal (median duration of catheterization, 3days) in hospitalized women (median age, 50 years) reportedsigniﬁcantly improved microbiologic and clinical outcomes at14 days in treated women [292]. Seven (17%) of 42 womenwho were randomized to receive no therapy developed CA-UTI by 14 days, whereas none of 70 women in the treatmentgroup became symptomatic. The long-term beneﬁt of screeningfor and eradicating postcatheterization CA-ASB to reduce CA-UTI warrants further study [16].
IV. WHAT ARE THE APPROPRIATE
MANAGEMENT STRATEGIES FOR PATIENTSWITH CA-UTI?
Urine Culture and Catheter Replacement before Treatment
Recommendations
45. A urine specimen for culture should be obtained prior
to initiating antimicrobial therapy for presumed CA-UTI be-cause of the wide spectrum of potential infecting organismsand the increased likelihood of antimicrobial resistance (A-III).
46. If an indwelling catheter has been in place for
12 weeks
at the onset of CA-UTI and is still indicated, the catheter shouldbe replaced to hasten resolution of symptoms and to reducethe risk of subsequent CA-bacteriuria and CA-UTI (A-I).i. The urine culture should be obtained from the freshly
placed catheter prior to the initiation of antimicrobial therapyto help guide treatment (A-II).
ii. If use of the catheter can be discontinued, a culture of
a voided midstream urine specimen should be obtained priorto the initiation of antimicrobial therapy to help guide treat-ment (A-III).
Evidence Summary
CA-UTIs are often polymicrobial and caused by multidrug-resistant uropathogens. Urine cultures are recommended priorto treatment to conﬁrm that an empirical regimen providesappropriate coverage and to allow tailoring of the regimen onthe basis of antimicrobial susceptibility data [293]. A prospec-tive, randomized, controlled trial evaluated whether long-termurinary catheters should be replaced prior to treatment of CA-UTI [107]. Twenty-one male and 33 female elderly nursinghome residents with long-term indwelling urinary catheters(time since most recent replacement, 2.5–5 weeks) and CA-UTI were randomized to indwelling catheter replacement orno replacement before initiating antimicrobial therapy with aﬂuoroquinolone. Patients who underwent catheter replacementhad signiﬁcantly decreased polymicrobic CA-bacteriuria 28days after antimicrobials were discontinued ( ), a shorter Pp.02
time to improved clinical status at 72 h after the initiation oftherapy ( ) and a lower rate of CA-UTI within 28 days P
!.001
after therapy ( ). These ﬁndings support catheter re- Pp.015
placement prior to antimicrobial treatment for CA-UTI if thecatheter has been in place for at least 2 weeks and its use cannotbe discontinued. Because catheter urine culture results in apatient with a catheter bioﬁlm may not accurately reﬂect thestatus of infection in the bladder [89–91], urine culture spec-imens should be obtained from the freshly placed catheters, iffeasible, prior to the initiation of antimicrobial therapy.
Duration of Treatment
Recommendations
47. Seven days is the recommended duration of antimi-
crobial treatment for patients with CA-UTI who have promptresolution of symptoms (A-III), and 10–14 days of treatmentis recommended for those with a delayed response (A-III),regardless of whether the patient remains catheterized or not.
i. A 5-day regimen of levoﬂoxacin may be considered in
patients with CA-UTI who are not severely ill (B-III). Data areinsufﬁcient to make such a recommendation about other ﬂu-oroquinolones.
ii. A 3-day antimicrobial regimen may be considered for
women aged /H1108865 years who develop CA-UTI without upper
urinary tract symptoms after an indwelling catheter has beenremoved (B-II).Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article/50/5/625/324341 by MUSC Library user on 12 November 2025

Urinary Catheter Guidelines •CID 2010:50 (1 March) •655Evidence Summary
There is a wide spectrum of conditions represented in patients
with complicated UTI, including those with CA-UTI, such as
simple cystitis, pyelonephritis, pyelonephritis with abscess,
prostatitis, and bacteremia. There are no published trial data
that provide treatment outcomes for these different types of
patients with CA-UTI, and thus the optimal duration of an-timicrobial treatment for CA-UTI is not known. In published
reviews, recommended treatment durations for complicated
UTI have included 7–10 days [18], 7–14 days [77], and 10–21
days [237], depending on the severity of the infection. Courses
of 5–14 days have often been recommended for CA-UTI in
patients with neurogenic bladders [98]. It is desirable to limit
the duration of treatment, especially for milder infections and
infections that respond promptly to treatment, to reduce the
selection pressure for drug-resistant ﬂora, especially in patients
with long-term catheterization. Harding et al [292] demon-
strated in a randomized, controlled trial that women with lower
urinary tract CA-UTI after catheter removal had similar res-
olution rates with single-dose therapy and 10 days of therapy
with trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole (11 [79%] of 14 patientsvs 13 [81%] of 16 patients), with better outcomes among
women
!65 years of age. In an open trial involving women
with upper urinary tract CA-UTI, 10 days of treatment led to
resolution in 6 (67%) of 9 patients [292].
In a study involving 46 men and women with neurogenic
bladders managed by intermittent catheterization, a 10-day
course of an antimicrobial to which the infecting strain was
susceptible (most patients received trimethoprim-sulfameth-
oxazole) was no more effective than a 3-day course in treating
episodes (29 in each group) of CA-bacteriuria, approximatelyone-half of which were CA-UTI (41% in the 3-day group vs
55% in the 10-day group) [235]. Rates of cure, persistence, and
relapse were similar in the 2 treatment groups. A more recent
randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial was per-
formed that compared 3-day and 14-day regimens of cipro-ﬂoxacin (250 mg twice daily) for the treatment of mild CA-UTI in a group of 60 patients with spinal cord injury, most of
whom used intermittent catheterization [294]. Microbiological
cure, but not clinical cure, at long-term follow-up was signif-
icantly better among patients who received therapy for 14 daysthan it was among patients who received therapy for 3 days.Microbiological and symptomatic relapse were signiﬁcantly
more common in the 3-day treatment group. The authors con-
cluded that, for patients with spinal cord injury, treatment of
CA-UTI for 14 days leads to improved clinical and microbi-ological outcomes, compared with short-course therapy. Be-cause there was no difference in clinical outcome between the2 treatment groups at long-term follow-up, it seems likely thatthe optimal treatment duration in such patients is between 3and 14 days.In another recent multicenter, double-blind, randomized,
noninferiority study involving 619 patients with acute pyelo-
nephritis or complicated UTI (only 68 [11%] of whom werecatheterized), levoﬂoxacin (750 mg intravenously or orally oncedaily for 5 days) was compared with ciproﬂoxacin (400 mgintravenously and/or ciproﬂoxacin 500 mg orally twice dailyfor 10 days) [295]. A detailed description of the types of com-plicated UTI in the treatment groups was not provided. Clinicalsuccess rates after treatment were similar (81% vs 80%), aswere microbiologic eradication rates (80% vs 80%). Microbi-ologic eradication was lower among subjects with a catheterthan it was among those without a catheter, but among cath-eterized patients, the microbiologic eradication rate was higherin the levoﬂoxacin group (79%) than it was in the ciproﬂoxacingroup (53%; 95% CI, 3.6%–47.7%). Clinical outcomes for cath-eterized subjects were not reported.
Use of the urinary catheter should always be discontinued
as soon as appropriate. A 7–14-day regimen is recommendedfor most patients with CA-UTI, regardless whether the patientremains catheterized or not. A 5-day regimen with levoﬂoxacinis likely to be sufﬁcient for most patients with mild CA-UTI.A shorter course, such as a 3-day regimen commonly used inuncomplicated UTI [296], is reasonable for younger womenwith mild CA-UTI after the catheter has been removed. Mox-iﬂoxacin should be avoided for the treatment of UTI becauseof uncertainty regarding effective concentrations in urine. Dataon local antimicrobial resistance, when available, should be usedto help guide empirical treatment. Shorter durations of treat-ment are preferred in appropriate patients to limit developmentof resistance. Regimens should be adjusted as appropriate de-pending on the culture and susceptibility results and the clinicalcourse. Treatment may need to be extended and a urologicevaluation may need to be performed if the patient does nothave a prompt clinical response with defervescence by 72 h.
FUTURE DIRECTIONS AND GAPS
IN KNOWLEDGE IN DIAGNOSIS, PREVENTION,AND MANAGEMENT OF CA-UTI
There are many gaps in our knowledge about CA-ASB and CA-
UTI. This is attributable in part to the poor quality of manyclinical studies, which are often poorly designed and under-
powered. Methodology in these studies is often not adequately
described, the terminology is not standardized, and outcomes
are usually limited to CA-bacteriuria (which is largely com-prised of CA-ASB). A better understanding of the relationshipbetween CA-ASB and CA-UTI is needed, particularly whethera reduction in CA-ASB results in a reduction in CA-UTI, in-appropriate antimicrobial use, or cross-infection. How bacteriaascend into the bladder in catheterized patients and why meatalcleansing strategies have not been successful in reducing CA-bacteriuria, given the apparent importance of meatal coloni-Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article/50/5/625/324341 by MUSC Library user on 12 November 2025

656 •CID 2010:50 (1 March) •Hooton et alzation in the pathogenesis of CA-UTI, are important questions.
There is a need for better tools to distinguish CA-ASB from
CA-UTI, including colony count criteria, because the classic
symptoms and signs that denote symptomatic infection are
seldom useful for catheterized patients. Nonspeciﬁcity of symp-toms and signs leads to frequent inappropriate treatment ofCA-bacteriuria. Further analysis of the cost-beneﬁt of inter-ventions, such as use of antimicrobial-coated catheters, is war-
ranted. Funguria is more common among nosocomial UTIs
than is widely recognized, and more research is warranted intoits diagnosis, need for treatment, and prevention.
Continued development of intraurethral alternatives to in-
dwelling catheterization in men and women and external urine
collection alternatives to indwelling catheterization in women,
as well as evaluations of whether these devices reduce the risk
of CA-UTI, are needed. Use of bacterial interference by in-oculation of organisms of low virulence into the bladder toreduce the risk of CA-UTI in patients with long-term cathe-
terization is promising, but the clinical data are sparse [297].
Major advances in the prevention of CA-ASB and CA-UTI will
require development of biomaterials that prevent or limit bio-
ﬁlm formation. Unfortunately, despite signiﬁcant advances in
basic science research involving biocompatibility issues and bio-
ﬁlm formation, infection and encrustation remain associated
with the use of biomaterials in the urinary tract and, therefore,
limit their long-term indwelling time [298], but research is
promising in this area [96, 97, 299].
PERFORMANCE MEASURES
Performance measures are indicators to help guideline users
gauge potential effects and beneﬁts of implementation of the
guidelines. Such tools can be indicators of the actual process,
short-term and long-term outcomes, or both. Reduction of
indwelling urinary catheterization is the most effective way to
reduce the morbidity and mortality associated with CA-bac-
teriuria.
1. Institutions should develop a list of appropriate indica-
tions for inserting indwelling urinary catheters, educate staff
about such indications, and periodically assess adherence to the
institution-speciﬁc guidelines. A reasonable target is that at least
90% of indwelling urinary catheters placed in the institutionbe for appropriate indications.
2. Institutions should require a physician’s order in the chart
before an indwelling catheter is placed and periodically assessadherence to this requirement. A reasonable target is that atleast 95% of indwelling urinary catheters placed in the insti-tution be preceded by a physician’s order.
3. Institutions should consider nurse-based or electronic
physician reminder systems and/or automatic stop-orders toreduce inappropriate urinary catheterization. A reasonable tar-get is that at least 90% of indwelling urinary catheter–days be
for appropriate indications.
Acknowledgments
The Guideline Panel wishes to express its gratitude to Drs Alan Ronald,
Jack Warren, and Barbara Trautner, for their thoughtful reviews of earlier
drafts of the manuscript.
Financial support. Support for these guidelines was provided by the
Infectious Diseases Society of America.
Potential conﬂicts of interest. T.M.H. has served as a consultant to
Alita Pharmaceuticals. D.D.C. has served as a consultant to Coloplast A/S, has received research funding from Coloplast A/C and AstraT ech andhas received honoraria from Alita Pharmaceuticals. A.J.S. has served as aconsultant to Pﬁzer, Novabay Pharmaceuticals, Exoxemis, Alita Pharma-ceuticals, American Medical Systems, Monitor Company Group, PropagatePharma, Hagen/Sinclair Research Recruiting, and Advanstar Communi-cations; has received honoraria from Haymarket Media, CombinatoRx, TheScientiﬁc Consulting Group, and the Multidisciplinary Alliance AgainstDevice–Related Infections; and has received other remuneration from theAmerican Society of Microbiology and the American Urological Associa-tion. S.E.G. has served as a consultant to and received honoraria fromMerck, GlaxoSmithKline, Bristol-Myers Squibb, and AstraZeneca. S.S. hasreceived honoraria from VHA. P .A.T. has received research support fromBaxter, Merck, Pﬁzer, Merlion Pharma, and Interimmune. R.C. has servedas consultant to Johnson & Johnson. L.E.N. has served as a consultant toPﬁzer, Johnson & Johnson, and Leo Pharmaceuticals. All other authors:no conﬂicts.
References
1. Pappas PG, Kauffman CA, Andes D, et al. Clinical practice guidelines
for the management of candidiasis: 2009 update by the InfectiousDiseases Society of America. Clin Infect Dis 2009 ; 48:503–535.
2. National Nosocomial Infections Surveillance (NNIS) System Report,
data summary from January 1992 through June 2004, issued October2004. Am J Infect Control 2004 ; 32:470–485.
3. Haley RW, Hooton TM, Culver DH, et al. Nosocomial infections in
U.S. hospitals, 1975–1976: estimated frequency by selected charac-teristics of patients. Am J Med 1981 ; 70:947–959.
4. Platt R, Polk BF, Murdock B, et al. Mortality associated with noso-
comial urinary-tract infection. N Engl J Med 1982 ; 307:637–642.
5. Nicolle LE, Strausbaugh LJ, Garibaldi RA. Infections and antibiotic
resistance in nursing homes. Clin Microbiol Rev 1996 ; 9:1–17.
6. Smith PW, Bennett G, Bradley S, et al. SHEA/APIC guideline: infec-
tion prevention and control in the long-term care facility, July 2008.Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 2008 ; 29:785–814.
7. Saint S, Kowalski CP , Kaufman SR, et al. Preventing hospital-acquired
urinary tract infection in the United States: a national study. ClinInfect Dis 2008 ; 46:243–250.
8. Wald HL, Kramer AM. Nonpayment for harms resulting from medical
care: catheter-associated urinary tract infections. JAMA 2007 ; 298:
2782–2784.
9. Field MJ, Lohr KN. Institute of Medicine Committee to Advise the
Public Health Service on Clinical Practice Guidelines. Clinical practiceguidelines: directions for a new program. Washington, DC: NationalAcademy Press, 1990 :52–77.
10. The periodic health examination. Canadian Task Force on the Periodic
Health Examination. Can Med Assoc J 1979 ; 121:1193–1254.
11. Tambyah PA. Catheter-associated urinary tract infections: diagnosis
and prophylaxis. Int J Antimicrob Agents 2004 ; 24(Suppl 1):S44–S48.
12. Haley RW, Culver DH, White JW, et al. The nationwide nosocomial
infection rate: a new need for vital statistics. Am J Epidemiol 1985 ;
121:159–167.
13. Warren JW. The catheter and urinary tract infection. Med Clin North
Am 1991 ; 75:481–493.Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article/50/5/625/324341 by MUSC Library user on 12 November 2025

Urinary Catheter Guidelines •CID 2010:50 (1 March) •65714. Garibaldi RA, Burke JP , Dickman ML, et al. Factors predisposing to
bacteriuria during indwelling urethral catheterization. N Engl J Med
1974 ; 291:215–219.
15. Weinstein JW, Mazon D, Pantelick E, et al. A decade of prevalence
surveys in a tertiary-care center: trends in nosocomial infection rates,device utilization, and patient acuity. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol1999 ; 20:543–548.
16. Warren JW. Catheter-associated urinary tract infections. Infect Dis
Clin North Am 1997 ; 11:609–622.
17. Warren JW, Steinberg L, Hebel JR, et al. The prevalence of urethral
catheterization in Maryland nursing homes. Arch Intern Med 1989 ;
149:1535–1537.
18. Warren JW. Catheter-associated bacteriuria in long-term care facilities.
Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 1994 ; 15:557–562.
19. Garibaldi RA, Brodine S, Matsumiya S. Infections among patients in
nursing homes: policies, prevalence, problems. N Engl J Med 1981 ;
305:731–735.
20. Warren JW, Tenney JH, Hoopes JM, et al. A prospective microbiologic
study of bacteriuria in patients with chronic indwelling urethral cath-eters. J Infect Dis 1982 ; 146:719–723.
21. Terpenning MS, Allada R, Kauffman CA. Intermittent urethral cath-
eterization in the elderly. J Am Geriatr Soc 1989 ; 37:411–416.
22. Bladder management for adults with spinal cord injury: a clinical
practice guideline for health-care providers. J Spinal Cord Med 2006 ;
29:527–573.
23. Jamil F. Towards a catheter free status in neurogenic bladder dys-
function: a review of bladder management options in spinal cordinjury (SCI). Spinal Cord 2001 ; 39:355–361.
24. Wyndaele JJ. Complications of intermittent catheterization: their pre-
vention and treatment. Spinal Cord 2002 ; 40:536–541.
25. Esclarin De Ruz A, Garcia Leoni E, Herruzo Cabrera R. Epidemiology
and risk factors for urinary tract infection in patients with spinal cordinjury. J Urol 2000 ; 164:1285–1289.
26. Kunin CM, McCormack RC. Prevention of catheter-induced urinary-
tract infections by sterile closed drainage. N Engl J Med 1966 ; 274:
1155–1161.
27. Hartstein AI, Garber SB, Ward TT, et al. Nosocomial urinary tract
infection: a prospective evaluation of 108 catheterized patients. InfectControl 1981 ; 2:380–386.
28. Warren JW, Damron D, Tenney JH, et al. Fever, bacteremia, and death
as complications of bacteriuria in women with long-term urethralcatheters. J Infect Dis 1987 ; 155:1151–1158.
29. Classen DC, Larsen RA, Burke JP , et al. Prevention of catheter-as-
sociated bacteriuria: clinical trial of methods to block three knownpathways of infection. Am J Infect Control 1991 ; 19:136–142.
30. Saint S, Lipsky BA. Preventing catheter-related bacteriuria: should
we? Can we? How? Arch Intern Med 1999 ; 159:800–808.
31. Maki DG, Tambyah PA. Engineering out the risk for infection with
urinary catheters. Emerg Infect Dis 2001 ; 7:342–347.
32. Saint S, Chenoweth CE. Bioﬁlms and catheter-associated urinary tract
infections. Infect Dis Clin North Am 2003 ; 17:411–432.
33. Huth TS, Burke JP , Larsen RA, et al. Randomized trial of meatal care
with silver sulfadiazine cream for the prevention of catheter-associated
bacteriuria. J Infect Dis 1992 ; 165:14–18.
34. Garibaldi RA, Burke JP , Britt MR, et al. Meatal colonization and
catheter-associated bacteriuria. N Engl J Med 1980 ; 303:316–318.
35. Platt R, Polk BF, Murdock B, et al. Risk factors for nosocomial urinary
tract infection. Am J Epidemiol 1986 ; 124:977–985.
36. Loeb M, Hunt D, O’Halloran K, et al. Stop orders to reduce inap-
propriate urinary catheterization in hospitalized patients: a random-
ized, controlled trial. J Gen Intern Med 2008 ; 23:816–820.
37. Bakke A, Digranes A, Hoisaeter PA. Physical predictors of infection
in patients treated with clean intermittent catheterization: a prospec-tive 7-year study. Br J Urol 1997 ; 79:85–90.
38. Saint S. Clinical and economic consequences of nosocomial catheter-
related bacteriuria. Am J Infect Control 2000 ; 28:68–75.
39. Garibaldi RA, Mooney BR, Epstein BJ, et al. An evaluation of dailybacteriologic monitoring to identify preventable episodes of catheter-
associated urinary tract infection. Infect Control 1982 ; 3:466–470.
40. Tambyah PA, Maki DG. Catheter-associated urinary tract infection is
rarely symptomatic: a prospective study of 1,497 catheterized patients.Arch Intern Med 2000 ; 160:678–682.
41. Golob JF Jr, Claridge JA, Sando MJ, et al. Fever and leukocytosis in
critically ill trauma patients: it’s not the urine. Surg Infect (Larchmt)2008 ; 9:49–56.
42. Bryan CS, Reynolds KL. Hospital-acquired bacteremic urinary tract
infection: epidemiology and outcome. J Urol 1984 ; 132:494–498.
43. Kreger BE, Craven DE, Carling PC, et al. Gram-negative bacteremia.
III. Reassessment of etiology, epidemiology and ecology in 612 pa-tients. Am J Med 1980 ; 68:332–343.
44. Krieger JN, Kaiser DL, Wenzel RP . Urinary tract etiology of blood-
stream infections in hospitalized patients. J Infect Dis 1983 ; 148:57–62.
45. Edgeworth JD, Treacher DF, Eykyn SJ. A 25-year study of nosocomial
bacteremia in an adult intensive care unit. Crit Care Med 1999 ; 27:
1421–1428.
46. Platt R, Polk BF, Murdock B, et al. Reduction of mortality associated
with nosocomial urinary tract infection. Lancet 1983 ; 1:893–897.
47. Stamm WE. Catheter-associated urinary tract infections: epidemiol-
ogy, pathogenesis, and prevention. Am J Med 1991 ; 91:65S-71S.
48. Laupland KB, Bagshaw SM, Gregson DB, et al. Intensive care unit-
acquired urinary tract infections in a regional critical care system.Crit Care 2005 ; 9:R60–R65.
49. Gross PA, Van Antwerpen C. Nosocomial infections and hospital
deaths: a case-control study. Am J Med 1983 ; 75:658–662.
50. Bagshaw SM, Laupland KB. Epidemiology of intensive care unit-ac-
quired urinary tract infections. Curr Opin Infect Dis 2006 ; 19:67–71.
51. Clec’h C, Schwebel C, Francais A, et al. Does catheter-associated urinary
tract infection increase mortality in critically ill patients? Infect ControlHosp Epidemiol 2007 ; 28:1367–1373.
52. Kunin CM, Chin QF, Chambers S. Morbidity and mortality associated
with indwelling urinary catheters in elderly patients in a nursinghome—confounding due to the presence of associated diseases. J AmGeriatr Soc 1987 ; 35:1001–1006.
53. Givens CD, Wenzel RP . Catheter-associated urinary tract infections
in surgical patients: a controlled study on the excess morbidity andcosts. J Urol 1980 ; 124:646–648.
54. Green MS, Rubinstein E, Amit P . Estimating the effects of nosocomi-
al infections on the length of hospitalization. J Infect Dis 1982 ; 145:
667–672.
55. Haley RW, Schaberg DR, Crossley KB, et al. Extra charges and pro-
longation of stay attributable to nosocomial infections: a prospectiveinterhospital comparison. Am J Med 1981 ; 70:51–58.
56. Tambyah PA, Knasinski V , Maki DG. The direct costs of nosocomial
catheter-associated urinary tract infection in the era of managed care.Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 2002 ; 23:27–31.
57. Karchmer TB, Giannetta ET, Muto CA, et al. A randomized crossover
study of silver-coated urinary catheters in hospitalized patients. ArchIntern Med 2000 ; 160:3294–3298.
58. Schaberg DR, Haley RW, Highsmith AK, et al. Nosocomial bacteriuria:
a prospective study of case clustering and antimicrobial resistance.
Ann Intern Med 1980 ; 93:420–424.
59. Schaberg DR, Alford RH, Anderson R, et al. An outbreak of noso-
comial infection due to multiply resistant Serratia marcescen: evidence
of interhospital spread. J Infect Dis 1976 ; 134:181–188.
60. Jarlier V , Fosse T, Philippon A. Antibiotic susceptibility in aerobic
gram-negative bacilli isolated in intensive care units in 39 French
teaching hospitals (ICU study). Intensive Care Med 1996 ; 22:1057–
1065.
61. Bjork DT, Pelletier LL, Tight RR. Urinary tract infections with an-
tibiotic resistant organisms in catheterized nursing home patients.Infect Control 1984 ; 5:173–176.
62. Krieger JN, Kaiser DL, Wenzel RP . Nosocomial urinary tract infections
cause wound infections postoperatively in surgical patients. Surg Gy-necol Obstet 1983 ; 156:313–318.Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article/50/5/625/324341 by MUSC Library user on 12 November 2025

658 •CID 2010:50 (1 March) •Hooton et al63. Wagenlehner FM, Krcmery S, Held C, et al. Epidemiological analysis
of the spread of pathogens from a urological ward using genotypic,
phenotypic and clinical parameters. Int J Antimicrob Agents 2002 ;
19:583–591.
64. Dalen DM, Zvonar RK, Jessamine PG. An evaluation of the man-
agement of asymptomatic catheter-associated bacteriuria and candid-uria at The Ottawa Hospital. Can J Infect Dis Med Microbiol 2005 ;16:
166–170.
65. Srinivasan A, Karchmer T, Richards A, et al. A prospective trial of a
novel, silicone-based, silver-coated foley catheter for the preventionof nosocomial urinary tract infections. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol
2006 ; 27:38–43.
66. Crnich CJ, Drinka PJ. Does the composition of urinary catheters
inﬂuence clinical outcomes and the results of research studies? Infect
Control Hosp Epidemiol 2007 ; 28:102–103.
67. Warren JW, Muncie HL Jr, Hall-Craggs M. Acute pyelonephritis as-
sociated with bacteriuria during long-term catheterization: a pro-
spective clinicopathological study. J Infect Dis 1988 ; 158:1341–1346.
68. Warren JW, Muncie HL Jr, Hebel JR, et al. Long-term urethral cath-
eterization increases risk of chronic pyelonephritis and renal inﬂam-
mation. J Am Geriatr Soc 1994 ; 42:1286–1290.
69. Mylotte JM. Nursing home-acquired bloodstream infection. Infect
Control Hosp Epidemiol 2005 ; 26:833–837.
70. Muder RR, Brennen C, Wagener MM, et al. Bacteremia in a long-
term-care facility: a ﬁve-year prospective study of 163 consecutive
episodes. Clin Infect Dis 1992 ; 14:647–654.
71. Rudman D, Hontanosas A, Cohen Z, et al. Clinical correlates of
bacteremia in a Veterans Administration extended care facility. J Am
Geriatr Soc 1988 ; 36:726–732.
72. Stevenson K. Standardized infection surveillance in long-term care:
interfacility comparisons from a regional cohort of facilities. Infect
Control Hosp Epidemiol 2005 ; 26:231–238.
73. Jewes LA, Gillespie WA, Leadbetter A, et al. Bacteriuria and bacterae-
mia in patients with long-term indwelling catheters—a domiciliarystudy. J Med Microbiol 1988 ; 26:61–65.
74. Polastri F, Auckenthaler R, Loew F, et al. Absence of signiﬁcant bac-
teremia during urinary catheter manipulation in patients with chronic
indwelling catheters. J Am Geriatr Soc 1990 ; 38:1203–1208.
75. Bregenzer T, Frei R, Widmer AF, et al. Low risk of bacteremia during
catheter replacement in patients with long-term urinary catheters.
Arch Intern Med 1997 ; 157:521–525.
76. Kunin CM, Douthitt S, Dancing J, et al. The association between the
use of urinary catheters and morbidity and mortality among elderly
patients in nursing homes. Am J Epidemiol 1992 ; 135:291–301.
77. Nicolle LE. Catheter-related urinary tract infection. Drugs Aging
2005 ; 22:627–639.
78. Cohen A. A microbiological comparison of a povidone-iodine lu-
bricating gel and a control as catheter lubricants. J Hosp Infect 1985 ;
6(Suppl A):155–161.
79. Daifuku R, Stamm WE. Bacterial adherence to bladder uroepithelial
cells in catheter-associated urinary tract infection. N Engl J Med 1986 ;
314:1208–1213.
80. Tambyah PA, Halvorson KT, Maki DG. A prospective study of path-
ogenesis of catheter-associated urinary tract infections. Mayo ClinProc 1999 ; 74:131–136.
81. Daifuku R, Stamm WE. Association of rectal and urethral colonization
with urinary tract infection in patients with indwelling catheters.
JAMA 1984 ; 252:2028–2030.
82. Nickel JC, Grant SK, Costerton JW. Catheter-associated bacteriuria:
an experimental study. Urology 1985 ; 26:369–375.
83. Schaeffer AJ. Catheter-associated bacteriuria. Urol Clin North Am
1986 ; 13:735–747.
84. Jacobsen SM, Stickler DJ, Mobley HL, et al. Complicated catheter-
associated urinary tract infections due to Escherichia coli and Proteus
mirabilis. Clin Microbiol Rev 2008 ; 21:26–59.
85. Ikaheimo R, Siitonen A, Karkkainen U, et al. Virulence characteristicsofEscherichia coli in nosocomial urinary tract infection. Clin Infect
Dis 1993 ; 16:785–791.
86. Guyer DM, Kao JS, Mobley HL. Genomic analysis of a pathogenicity
island in uropathogenic Escherichia coli CFT073: distribution of ho-
mologous sequences among isolates from patients with pyelonephritis,
cystitis, and catheter-associated bacteriuria and from fecal samples.Infect Immun 1998 ; 66:4411–4417.
87. Johnson JR. Microbial virulence determinants and the pathogenesis
of urinary tract infection. Infect Dis Clin North Am 2003 ; 17:261–278,
viii.
88. Ganderton L, Chawla J, Winters C, et al. Scanning electron microscopy
of bacterial bioﬁlms on indwelling bladder catheters. Eur J Clin Mi-crobiol Infect Dis 1992 ; 11:789–796.
89. Bergqvist D, Bronnestam R, Hedelin H, et al. The relevance of urinary
sampling methods in patients with indwelling Foley catheters. Br JUrol 1980 ; 52:92–95.
90. Grahn D, Norman DC, White ML, et al. Validity of urinary catheter
specimen for diagnosis of urinary tract infection in the elderly. ArchIntern Med 1985 ; 145:1858–1860.
91. Tenney JH, Warren JW. Bacteriuria in women with long-term cath-
eters: paired comparison of indwelling and replacement catheters. JInfect Dis 1988 ; 157:199–202.
92. Kunin CM, Chin QF, Chambers S. Indwelling urinary catheters in
the elderly: relation of “catheter life” to formation of encrustationsin patients with and without blocked catheters. Am J Med 1987 ;8 2 :
405–411.
93. Kunin CM. Blockage of urinary catheters: role of microorganisms and
constituents of the urine on formation of encrustations. J Clin Epi-demiol 1989 ; 42:835–842.
94. Morris NS, Stickler DJ, Winters C. Which indwelling urethral cath-
eters resist encrustation by Proteus mirabilis bioﬁlms? Br J Urol 1997 ;
80:58–63.
95. Morris NS, Stickler DJ. Encrustation of indwelling urethral catheters
byProteus mirabilis bioﬁlms growing in human urine. J Hosp Infect
1998 ; 39:227–234.
96. Stickler DJ, Evans A, Morris N, et al. Strategies for the control of
catheter encrustation. Int J Antimicrob Agents 2002 ; 19:499–506.
97. Tenke P , Riedl CR, Jones GL, et al. Bacterial bioﬁlm formation on
urologic devices and heparin coating as preventive strategy. Int J An-timicrob Agents 2004 ; 23(Suppl 1):S67–S74.
98. The prevention and management of urinary tract infections among
people with spinal cord injuries. National Institute on Disability andRehabilitation Research Consensus Statement. 27–29 January 1992. JAm Paraplegia Soc 1992 ; 15:194–204.
99. Stark RP , Maki DG. Bacteriuria in the catheterized patient: what quan-
titative level of bacteriuria is relevant? N Engl J Med 1984 ;3 1 1 :
560–564.
100. Stamm WE, Counts GW, Running KR, et al. Diagnosis of coliform
infection in acutely dysuric women. N Engl J Med 1982 ; 307:463–468.
101. Gribble MJ, McCallum NM, Schechter MT. Evaluation of diagnostic
criteria for bacteriuria in acutely spinal cord injured patients under-going intermittent catheterization. Diagn Microbiol Infect Dis 1988 ;9:
197–206.
102. Ouslander JG, Greengold BA, Silverblatt FJ, et al. An accurate method
to obtain urine for culture in men with external catheters. Arch Intern
Med 1987 ; 147:286–288.
103. Nicolle LE, Harding GK, Kennedy J, et al. Urine specimen collection
with external devices for diagnosis of bacteriuria in elderly incontinentmen. J Clin Microbiol 1988 ; 26:1115–1119.
104. Lipsky BA, Ireton RC, Fihn SD, et al. Diagnosis of bacteriuria in men:
specimen collection and culture interpretation. J Infect Dis 1987 ; 155:
847–854.
105. Nicolle LE, Bradley S, Colgan R, et al. Infectious Diseases Society of
America guidelines for the diagnosis and treatment of asymptomaticbacteriuria in adults. Clin Infect Dis 2005 ; 40:643–654.
106. Horan TC, Andrus M, Dudeck MA. CDC/NHSN surveillance deﬁ-
nition of health care-associated infection and criteria for speciﬁc typesDownloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article/50/5/625/324341 by MUSC Library user on 12 November 2025

Urinary Catheter Guidelines •CID 2010:50 (1 March) •659of infections in the acute care setting. Am J Infect Control 2008 ; 36:
309–332.
107. Raz R, Schiller D, Nicolle LE. Chronic indwelling catheter replacement
before antimicrobial therapy for symptomatic urinary tract infection.
JU r o l 2000 ; 164:1254–1258.
108. Tambyah PA, Maki DG. The relationship between pyuria and infection
in patients with indwelling urinary catheters: a prospective study of761 patients. Arch Intern Med 2000 ; 160:673–677.
109. Musher DM, Thorsteinsson SB, Airola VM, II. Quantitative urinaly-
sis: diagnosing urinary tract infection in men. JAMA 1976 ; 236:2069–
2072.
110. Steward DK, Wood GL, Cohen RL, et al. Failure of the urinalysis and
quantitative urine culture in diagnosing symptomatic urinary tractinfections in patients with long-term urinary catheters. Am J InfectControl 1985 ; 13:154–160.
111. Gribble MJ, Puterman ML, McCallum NM. Pyuria: its relationship
to bacteriuria in spinal cord injured patients on intermittent cathe-terization. Arch Phys Med Rehabil 1989 ; 70:376–379.
112. Cardenas DD, Hooton TM. Urinary tract infection in persons with
spinal cord injury. Arch Phys Med Rehabil 1995 ; 76:272–80.
113. Schwartz DS, Barone JE. Correlation of urinalysis and dipstick results
with catheter-associated urinary tract infections in surgical ICU pa-tients. Intensive Care Med 2006 ; 32:1797–1801.
114. Norberg B, Norberg A, Parkhede U, et al. Effect of short-term high-
dose treatment with methenamine hippurate on urinary infection ingeriatric patients with an indwelling catheter. IV . Clinical evaluation.Eur J Clin Pharmacol 1979 ; 15:357–361.
115. Walker S, McGeer A, Simor AE, et al. Why are antibiotics prescribed
for asymptomatic bacteriuria in institutionalized elderly people? Aqualitative study of physicians’ and nurses’ perceptions. CMAJ 2000 ;
163:273–277.
116. Nicolle LE. Consequences of asymptomatic bacteriuria in the elderly.
Int J Antimicrob Agents 1994 ; 4:107–111.
117. Nicolle LE. Urinary tract infections in long-term-care facilities. Infect
Control Hosp Epidemiol 2001 ; 22:167–175.
118. Loeb M, Bentley DW, Bradley S, et al. Development of minimum
criteria for the initiation of antibiotics in residents of long-term-carefacilities: results of a consensus conference. Infect Control Hosp Ep-idemiol 2001 ; 22:120–124.
119. Loeb M, Brazil K, Lohfeld L, et al. Effect of a multifaceted intervention
on number of antimicrobial prescriptions for suspected urinary tractinfections in residents of nursing homes: cluster randomised con-trolled trial. BMJ 2005 ; 331:669.
120. Jain P , Parada JP , David A, et al. Overuse of the indwelling urinary
tract catheter in hospitalized medical patients. Arch Intern Med 1995 ;
155:1425–1429.
121. Wong ES. Guideline for prevention of catheter-associated urinary tract
infections. Am J Infect Control 1983 ; 11:28–36.
122. Munasinghe RL, Y azdani H, Siddique M, et al. Appropriateness of
use of indwelling urinary catheters in patients admitted to the medicalservice. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 2001 ; 22:647–649.
123. Gardam MA, Amihod B, Orenstein P , et al. Overutilization of in-
dwelling urinary catheters and the development of nosocomial urinary
tract infections. Clin Perform Qual Health Care 1998 ; 6:99–102.
124. Gokula RR, Hickner JA, Smith MA. Inappropriate use of urinary
catheters in elderly patients at a midwestern community teaching
hospital. Am J Infect Control 2004 ; 32:196–199.
125. Wald HL, Epstein AM, Radcliff TA, et al. Extended use of urinary
catheters in older surgical patients: a patient safety problem? Infect
Control Hosp Epidemiol 2008 ; 29:116–124.
126. Saint S, Wiese J, Amory JK, et al. Are physicians aware of which of
their patients have indwelling urinary catheters? Am J Med 2000 ; 109:
476–480.
127. Gokula RM, Smith MA, Hickner J. Emergency room staff education
and use of a urinary catheter indication sheet improves appropriateuse of foley catheters. Am J Infect Control 2007 ; 35:589–593.
128. Stephan F, Sax H, Wachsmuth M, et al. Reduction of urinary tractinfection and antibiotic use after surgery: a controlled, prospective,
before-after intervention study. Clin Infect Dis 2006 ; 42:1544–1551.
129. Lau H, Lam B. Management of postoperative urinary retention: a
randomized trial of in-out versus overnight catheterization. ANZ JSurg 2004 ; 74:658–661.
130. Lukasse M, Cederkvist HR, Rosseland LA. Reliability of an automatic
ultrasound system for detecting postpartum urinary retention aftervaginal birth. Acta Obstet Gynecol Scand 2007 :1–5.
131. Slappendel R, Weber EW. Non-invasive measurement of bladder vol-
ume as an indication for bladder catheterization after orthopaedicsurgery and its effect on urinary tract infections. Eur J Anaesthesiol1999 ; 16:503–506.
132. Fedorkow DM, Dore S, Cotton A. The use of an ultrasound bladder
scanning device in women undergoing urogynaecologic surgery. JObstet Gynaecol Can 2005 ; 27:945–948.
133. Kunin CM. Nosocomial urinary tract infections and the indwelling
catheter: what is new and what is true? Chest 2001 ; 120:10–12.
134. Stevens E. Bladder ultrasound: avoiding unnecessary catheterizations.
Medsurg Nurs 2005 ; 14:249–253.
135. Grifﬁths R, Fernandez R. Strategies for the removal of short-term
indwelling urethral catheters in adults. Cochrane Database Syst Rev2007 :CD004011.
136. Phipps S, Lim YN, McClinton S, et al. Short term urinary catheter
policies following urogenital surgery in adults. Cochrane DatabaseSyst Rev 2006 :CD004374.
137. Huang WC, Wann SR, Lin SL, et al. Catheter-associated urinary tract
infections in intensive care units can be reduced by prompting phy-sicians to remove unnecessary catheters. Infect Control Hosp Epi-demiol 2004 ; 25:974–978.
138. Apisarnthanarak A, Thongphubeth K, Sirinvaravong S, et al. Effec-
tiveness of multifaceted hospitalwide quality improvement programsfeaturing an intervention to remove unnecessary urinary catheters ata tertiary care center in Thailand. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol2007 ; 28:791–798.
139. Saint S, Kaufman SR, Thompson M, et al. A reminder reduces urinary
catheterization in hospitalized patients. Jt Comm J Qual Patient Saf2005 ; 31:455–462.
140. Evans RS, Pestotnik SL, Classen DC, et al. A computer-assisted man-
agement program for antibiotics and other antiinfective agents. NEngl J Med 1998 ; 338:232–238.
141. Cornia PB, Amory JK, Fraser S, et al. Computer-based order entry
decreases duration of indwelling urinary catheterization in hospital-ized patients. Am J Med 2003 ; 114:404–407.
142. Topal J, Conklin S, Camp K, et al. Prevention of nosocomial catheter-
associated urinary tract infections through computerized feedback tophysicians and a nurse-directed protocol. Am J Med Qual 2005 ;2 0 :
121–126.
143. Lo E, Nicolle L, Classen D, et al. Strategies to prevent catheter-as-
sociated urinary tract infections in acute care hospitals. Infect ControlHosp Epidemiol 2008 ; 29(Suppl 1):S41–S50.
144. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Healthcare Infection
Control Practices Advisory Committee (HICPAC) Web page. http://www.cdc.gov/hicpac/index.html. Accessed 21 January 2010.
145. Zimakoff JD, Pontoppidan B, Larsen SO, et al. The management of
urinary catheters: compliance of practice in Danish hospitals, nursing
homes and home care to national guidelines. Scand J Urol Nephrol1995 ; 29:299–309.
146. Haley RW, Culver DH, White JW, et al. The efﬁcacy of infection
surveillance and control programs in preventing nosocomial infec-tions in US hospitals. Am J Epidemiol 1985 ; 121:182–205.
147. Tenke P , Kovacs B, Bjerklund Johansen TE, et al. European and Asian
guidelines on management and prevention of catheter-associated uri-
nary tract infections. Int J Antimicrob Agents 2008 ; 31(Suppl 1):
S68–S78.
148. Bukhari SS, Sanderson PJ, Richardson DM, et al. Endemic cross-
infection in an acute medical ward. J Hosp Infect 1993 ; 24:261–271.
149. Fryklund B, Haeggman S, Burman LG. Transmission of urinary bac-Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article/50/5/625/324341 by MUSC Library user on 12 November 2025

660 •CID 2010:50 (1 March) •Hooton et alterial strains between patients with indwelling catheters—nursing in
the same room and in separate rooms compared. J Hosp Infect 1997 ;
36:147–153.
150. Thompson RL, Haley CE, Searcy MA, et al. Catheter-associated bac-
teriuria: failure to reduce attack rates using periodic instillations of adisinfectant into urinary drainage systems. JAMA 1984 ; 251:747–751.
151. Goetz AM, Kedzuf S, Wagener M, et al. Feedback to nursing staff as
an intervention to reduce catheter-associated urinary tract infections.Am J Infect Control 1999 ; 27:402–404.
152. Rosenthal VD, Guzman S, Safdar N. Effect of education and perfor-
mance feedback on rates of catheter-associated urinary tract infectionin intensive care units in Argentina. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol2004 ; 25:47–50.
153. Saint S, Kowalski CP , Forman J, et al. A multicenter qualitative study
on preventing hospital-acquired urinary tract infection in US hos-pitals. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 2008 ; 29:333–341.
154. Saint S, Meddings JA, Calfee D, et al. Catheter-associated urinary tract
infection and the Medicare rule changes. Ann Intern Med 2009 ; 150:
877–884.
155. Guttman L, Frankel H. The value of intermittent catheterization in
the early management of traumatic paraplegia and tetraplegia. Par-aplegia 1966 ; 4:63–84.
156. Lapides J, Diokno AC, Silber SJ, et al. Clean, intermittent self-cath-
eterization in the treatment of urinary tract disease. J Urol 1972 ; 107:
458–461.
157. Erickson RP , Merritt JL, Opitz JL, et al. Bacteriuria during follow-up
in patients with spinal cord injury: I. Rates of bacteriuria in variousbladder-emptying methods. Arch Phys Med Rehabil 1982 ; 63:409–412.
158. Weld KJ, Dmochowski RR. Effect of bladder management on urol-
ogical complications in spinal cord injured patients. J Urol 2000 ; 163:
768–772.
159. Jamison J, Maguire S, McCann J. Catheter policies for management
of long term voiding problems in adults with neurogenic bladderdisorders. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2004 :CD004375.
160. Duffy LM, Cleary J, Ahern S, et al. Clean intermittent catheterization:
safe, cost-effective bladder management for male residents of V A nurs-ing homes. J Am Geriatr Soc 1995 ; 43:865–870.
161. Niel-Weise BS, van den Broek PJ. Urinary catheter policies for short-
term bladder drainage in adults. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2005 :
CD004203.
162. Moore KN, Fader M, Getliffe K. Long-term bladder management by
intermittent catheterisation in adults and children. Cochrane DatabaseSyst Rev 2007 :CD006008.
163. Moore KN, Burt J, Voaklander DC. Intermittent catheterization in
the rehabilitation setting: a comparison of clean and sterile technique.Clin Rehabil 2006 ; 20:461–468.
164. King RB, Carlson CE, Mervine J, et al. Clean and sterile intermittent
catheterization methods in hospitalized patients with spinal cord in-jury. Arch Phys Med Rehabil 1992 ; 73:798–802.
165. Moore KN, Kelm M, Sinclair O, et al. Bacteriuria in intermittent
catheterization users: the effect of sterile versus clean reused catheters.Rehabil Nurs 1993 ; 18:306–309.
166. Pachler J, Frimodt-Moller C. A comparison of prelubricated hydro-
philic and non-hydrophilic polyvinyl chloride catheters for urethralcatheterization. BJU Int 1999 ; 83:767–769.
167. Prieto-Fingerhut T, Banovac K, Lynne CM. A study comparing sterile
and nonsterile urethral catheterization in patients with spinal cordinjury. Rehabil Nurs 1997 ; 22:299–302.
168. Vaidyanathan S, Soni BM, Dundas S, et al. Urethral cytology in spinal
cord injury patients performing intermittent catheterisation. Para-plegia 1994 ; 32:493–500.
169. Diokno AC, Mitchell BA, Nash AJ, et al. Patient satisfaction and the
LoFric catheter for clean intermittent catheterization. J Urol 1995 ;
153:349–351.
170. De Ridder DJ, Everaert K, Fernandez LG, et al. Intermittent cathet-
erisation with hydrophilic-coated catheters (SpeediCath) reduces therisk of clinical urinary tract infection in spinal cord injured patients:a prospective randomised parallel comparative trial. Eur Urol 2005 ;
48:991–995.
171. Vapnek JM, Maynard FM, Kim J. A prospective randomized trial of
the LoFric hydrophilic coated catheter versus conventional plasticcatheter for clean intermittent catheterization. J Urol 2003 ; 169:994–
998.
172. Sutherland RS, Kogan BA, Baskin LS, et al. Clean intermittent cath-
eterization in boys using the LoFric catheter. J Urol 1996 ; 156:2041–
2043.
173. Hedlund H, Hjelmas K, Jonsson O, et al. Hydrophilic versus non-
coated catheters for intermittent catheterization. Scand J Urol Nephrol2001 ; 35:49–53.
174. Lavallee DJ, Lapierre NM, Henwood PK, et al. Catheter cleaning for
re-use in intermittent catheterization: new light on an old problem.SCI Nurs 1995 ; 12:10–12.
175. Silbar EC, Cicmanec JF, Burke BM, et al. Microwave sterilization: a
method for home sterilization of urinary catheters. J Urol 1989 ; 141:
88–90.
176. Grifﬁth D, Nacey J, Robinson R, et al. Microwave sterilization of
polyethylene catheters for intermittent self-catheterization. Aust N ZJ Surg 1993 ; 63:203–204.
177. Bogaert GA, Goeman L, de Ridder D, et al. The physical and anti-
microbial effects of microwave heating and alcohol immersion oncatheters that are reused for clean intermittent catheterisation. EurUrol 2004 ; 46:641–646.
178. Douglas C, Burke B, Kessler DL, et al. Microwave: practical cost-
effective method for sterilizing urinary catheters in the home. Urology1990 ; 35:219–222.
179. Kurtz MJ, Van Zandt K, Burns JL. Comparison study of home catheter
cleaning methods. Rehabil Nurs 1995 ; 20:212–214, 217.
180. Cardenas DD, Kelly E, Krieger JN, et al. Residual urine volumes in
patients with spinal cord injury: measurement with a portable ultra-sound instrument. Arch Phys Med Rehabil 1988 ; 69:514–516.
181. Coombes GM, Millard RJ. The accuracy of portable ultrasound scan-
ning in the measurement of residual urine volume. J Urol 1994 ; 152:
2083–2085.
182. Goode PS, Locher JL, Bryant RL, et al. Measurement of postvoid
residual urine with portable transabdominal bladder ultrasound scan-ner and urethral catheterization. Int Urogynecol J Pelvic Floor Dys-funct 2000 ; 11:296–300.
183. Ding YY, Sahadevan S, Pang WS, et al. Clinical utility of a portable
ultrasound scanner in the measurement of residual urine volume.Singapore Med J 1996 ; 37:365–368.
184. Polliack T, Bluvshtein V , Philo O, et al. Clinical and economic con-
sequences of volume- or time-dependent intermittent catheterizationin patients with spinal cord lesions and neuropathic bladder. SpinalCord 2005 ; 43:615–619.
185. De Ridder D, Van Poppel H, Baert L, et al. From time dependent
intermittent self-catheterisation to volume dependent self-catheter-isation in multiple sclerosis using the PCI 5000 Bladdermanager. Spi-nal Cord 1997 ; 35:613–616.
186. Anton HA, Chambers K, Clifton J, et al. Clinical utility of a portable
ultrasound device in intermittent catheterization. Arch Phys MedRehabil 1998 ; 79:172–175.
187. Hudson E, Murahata RI. The ‘no-touch’ method of intermittent uri-
nary catheter insertion: can it reduce the risk of bacteria entering thebladder? Spinal Cord 2005 ; 43:611–614.
188. Branagan GW, Moran BJ. Published evidence favors the use of su-
prapubic catheters in pelvic colorectal surgery. Dis Colon Rectum2002 ; 45:1104–1108.
189. Jannelli ML, Wu JM, Plunkett LW, et al. A randomized, controlled
trial of clean intermittent self-catheterization versus suprapubic cath-eterization after urogynecologic surgery. Am J Obstet Gynecol 2007 ;
197:72 e1–e4.
190. Ouslander JG, Greengold B, Chen S. External catheter use and urinaryDownloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article/50/5/625/324341 by MUSC Library user on 12 November 2025

Urinary Catheter Guidelines •CID 2010:50 (1 March) •661tract infections among incontinent male nursing home patients. J Am
Geriatr Soc 1987 ; 35:1063–1070.
191. Ouslander JG, Greengold B, Chen S. Complications of chronic in-
dwelling urinary catheters among male nursing home patients: a pro-spective study. J Urol 1987 ; 138:1191–1195.
192. Hirsh DD, Fainstein V , Musher DM. Do condom catheter collecting
systems cause urinary tract infection? JAMA 1979 ; 242:340–341.
193. Hebel JR, Warren JW. The use of urethral, condom, and suprapubic
catheters in aged nursing home patients. J Am Geriatr Soc 1990 ;3 8 :
777–784.
194. Zimakoff J, Stickler DJ, Pontoppidan B, et al. Bladder management
and urinary tract infections in Danish hospitals, nursing homes, andhome care: a national prevalence study. Infect Control Hosp Epide-miol 1996 ; 17:215–221.
195. Saint S, Kaufman SR, Rogers MA, et al. Condom versus indwelling urinary
catheters: a randomized trial. J Am Geriatr Soc 2006 ; 54:1055–1061.
196. Hackler RH. A 25-year prospective mortality study in the spinal cord
injured patient: comparison with the long-term living paraplegic. JUrol 1977 ; 117:486–488.
197. Donnelly J, Hackler RH, Bunts RC. Present urologic status of the
World War II paraplegic: 25-year followup. Comparison with statusof the 20-year Korean War paraplegic and 5-year Vietnam paraplegic.JU r o l 1972 ; 108:558–562.
198. Shapiro M, Simchen E, Izraeli S, et al. A multivariate analysis of risk
factors for acquiring bacteriuria in patients with indwelling urinarycatheters for longer than 24 hours. Infect Control 1984 ; 5:525–532.
199. Carapeti EA, Andrews SM, Bentley PG. Randomised study of sterile
versus non-sterile urethral catheterisation. Ann R Coll Surg Engl1996 ; 78:59–60.
200. Kunin CM, McCormack RC. Prevention of catheter-induced urinary-
tract infections by a new sterile closed drainage system. AntimicrobAgents Chemother (Bethesda) 1965 ; 5:631–638.
201. Thornton GF, Andriole VT. Bacteriuria during indwelling catheter
drainage. II. Effect of a closed sterile drainage system. JAMA 1970 ;
214:339–342.
202. Wolff G, Gradel E, Buchman B. Indwelling catheter and risk of urinary
infection: a clinical investigation with a new closed-drainage system.Urol Res 1976 ; 4:15–18.
203. Kass EH. Asymptomatic infections of the urinary tract. Trans Assoc
Am Physicians 1956 ; 69:56–64.
204. Warren JW, Platt R, Thomas RJ, et al. Antibiotic irrigation and cath-
eter-associated urinary-tract infections. N Engl J Med 1978 ;2 9 9 :
570–573.
205. DeGroot-Kosolcharoen J, Guse R, Jones JM. Evaluation of a urinary
catheter with a preconnected closed drainage bag. Infect Control HospEpidemiol 1988 ; 9:72–76.
206. Leone M, Garnier F, Antonini F, et al. Comparison of effectiveness
of two urinary drainage systems in intensive care unit: a prospective,randomized clinical trial. Intensive Care Med 2003 ; 29:551–554.
207. Huth TS, Burke JP , Larsen RA, et al. Clinical trial of junction seals
for the prevention of urinary catheter-associated bacteriuria. ArchIntern Med 1992 ; 152:807–812.
208. Darouiche RO, Goetz L, Kaldis T, et al. Impact of StatLock securing
device on symptomatic catheter-related urinary tract infection: a pro-spective, randomized, multicenter clinical trial. Am J Infect Control2006 ; 34:555–560.
209. Darouiche RO, Safar H, Raad II. In vitro efﬁcacy of antimicrobial-
coated bladder catheters in inhibiting bacterial migration along cath-eter surface. J Infect Dis 1997 ; 176:1109–1112.
210. Johnson JR, Delavari P , Azar M. Activities of a nitrofurazone-con-
taining urinary catheter and a silver hydrogel catheter against mul-tidrug-resistant bacteria characteristic of catheter-associated urinarytract infection. Antimicrob Agents Chemother 1999 ; 43:2990–2995.
211. Ahearn DG, Grace DT, Jennings MJ, et al. Effects of hydrogel/silver
coatings on in vitro adhesion to catheters of bacteria associated withurinary tract infections. Curr Microbiol 2000 ; 41:120–125.212. Schumm K, Lam TB. Types of urethral catheters for management of
short-term voiding problems in hospitalised adults. Cochrane Da-tabase Syst Rev 2008 :CD004013.
213. Drekonja DM, Kuskowski MA, Wilt TJ, et al. Antimicrobial urinary
catheters: a systematic review. Expert Rev Med Devices 2008 ; 5:495–
506.
214. Johnson JR, Kuskowski MA, Wilt TJ. Systematic review: antimicrobial
urinary catheters to prevent catheter-associated urinary tract infectionin hospitalized patients. Ann Intern Med 2006 ; 144:116–126.
215. Saint S, Elmore JG, Sullivan SD, et al. The efﬁcacy of silver alloy-
coated urinary catheters in preventing urinary tract infection: a meta-analysis. Am J Med 1998 ; 105:236–241.
216. Brosnahan J, Jull A, Tracy C. Types of urethral catheters for man-
agement of short-term voiding problems in hospitalised adults. Coch-rane Database Syst Rev 2004 :CD004013.
217. Plowman R, Graves N, Esquivel J, et al. An economic model to assess
the cost and beneﬁts of the routine use of silver alloy coated urinarycatheters to reduce the risk of urinary tract infections in catheterizedpatients. J Hosp Infect 2001 ; 48:33–42.
218. Saint S, Veenstra DL, Sullivan SD, et al. The potential clinical and
economic beneﬁts of silver alloy urinary catheters in preventing uri-nary tract infection. Arch Intern Med 2000 ; 160:2670–2675.
219. Darouiche RO, Smith JA Jr, Hanna H, et al. Efﬁcacy of antimicrobial-
impregnated bladder catheters in reducing catheter-associated bac-teriuria: a prospective, randomized, multicenter clinical trial. Urology1999 ; 54:976–981.
220. Stensballe J, Tvede M, Looms D, et al. Infection risk with nitrofura-
zone-impregnated urinary catheters in trauma patients: a randomizedtrial. Ann Intern Med 2007 ; 147:285–293.
221. Jahn P , Preuss M, Kernig A, et al. Types of indwelling urinary catheters
for long-term bladder drainage in adults. Cochrane Database Syst Rev2007 :CD004997.
222. Rupp ME, Fitzgerald T, Marion N, et al. Effect of silver-coated urinary
catheters: efﬁcacy, cost-effectiveness, and antimicrobial resistance. AmJ Infect Control 2004 ; 32:445–450.
223. Kass EH. Chemotherapeutic and antibiotic drugs in the management
of infections of the urinary tract. Am J Med 1955 ; 18:764–781.
224. Johnson JR, Roberts PL, Olsen RJ, et al. Prevention of catheter-as-
sociated urinary tract infection with a silver oxide-coated urinarycatheter: clinical and microbiologic correlates. J Infect Dis 1990 ; 162:
1145–1150.
225. Riley DK, Classen DC, Stevens LE, et al. A large randomized clinical
trial of a silver-impregnated urinary catheter: lack of efﬁcacy andstaphylococcal superinfection. Am J Med 1995 ; 98:349–356.
226. Hustinx WN, Mintjes-de Groot AJ, Verkooyen RP , et al. Impact of
concurrent antimicrobial therapy on catheter-associated urinary tractinfection. J Hosp Infect 1991 ; 18:45–56.
227. Niel-Weise BS, van den Broek PJ. Antibiotic policies for short-term
catheter bladder drainage in adults. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2005 :
CD005428.
228. Jaffe R, Altaras M, Fejgin M, et al. Prophylactic single-dose co-tri-
moxazole for prevention of urinary tract infection after abdominalhysterectomy. Chemotherapy 1985 ; 31:476–479.
229. van der Wall E, Verkooyen RP , Mintjes-de Groot J, et al. Prophylactic
ciproﬂoxacin for catheter-associated urinary-tract infection. Lancet1992 ; 339:946–951.
230. Morton SC, Shekelle PG, Adams JL, et al. Antimicrobial prophylaxis
for urinary tract infection in persons with spinal cord dysfunction.Arch Phys Med Rehabil 2002 ; 83:129–138.
231. Niel-Weise BS, van den Broek PJ. Urinary catheter policies for long-
term bladder drainage. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2005 :CD004201.
232. Rutschmann OT, Zwahlen A. Use of norﬂoxacin for prevention of
symptomatic urinary tract infection in chronically catheterized pa-tients. Eur J Clin Microbiol Infect Dis 1995 ; 14:441–444.
233. Anderson RU. Prophylaxis of bacteriuria during intermittent cathe-
terization of the acute neurogenic bladder. J Urol 1980 ; 123:364–366.Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article/50/5/625/324341 by MUSC Library user on 12 November 2025

662 •CID 2010:50 (1 March) •Hooton et al234. Duffy L, Smith AD. Nitrofurantoin macrocrystals prevent bacteriuria
in intermittent self-catheterization. Urology 1982 ; 20:47–49.
235. Mohler JL, Cowen DL, Flanigan RC. Suppression and treatment of
urinary tract infection in patients with an intermittently catheterized
neurogenic bladder. J Urol 1987 ; 138:336–340.
236. Gribble MJ, Puterman ML. Prophylaxis of urinary tract infection in
persons with recent spinal cord injury: a prospective, randomized,double-blind, placebo-controlled study of trimethoprim-sulfameth-oxazole. Am J Med 1993 ; 95:141–152.
237. Stamm WE, Hooton TM. Management of urinary tract infections in
adults. N Engl J Med 1993 ; 329:1328–1334.
238. Gleckman R, Alvarez S, Joubert DW, et al. Drug therapy reviews:
methenamine mandelate and methenamine hippurate. Am J HospPharm 1979 ; 36:1509–1512.
239. Pearman JW, Peterson GJ, Nash JB. The antimicrobial activity of urine
of paraplegic patients receiving methenamine mandelate. Invest Urol1978 ; 16:91–98.
240. Strom JG Jr, Jun HW. Effect of urine pH and ascorbic acid on the
rate of conversion of methenamine to formaldehyde. Biopharm DrugDispos 1993 ; 14:61–69.
241. Devenport JK, Swenson JR, Dukes GE Jr, et al. Formaldehyde gen-
eration from methenamine salts in spinal cord injury. Arch Phys MedRehabil 1984 ; 65:257–259.
242. Nahata MC, Cummins BA, McLeod DC. Effect of ascorbic acid on
urine pH. Am J Hosp Pharm 1981 ; 38:33–36.
243. Nahata MC, Cummins BA, McLeod DC, et al. Effect of urinary acid-
iﬁers on formaldehyde concentration and efﬁcacy with methenaminetherapy. Eur J Clin Pharmacol 1982 ; 22:281–284.
244. Wall I, Tiselius HG. Long-term acidiﬁcation of urine in patients
treated for infected renal stones. Urol Int 1990 ; 45:336–341.
245. Hetey SK, Kleinberg ML, Parker WD, et al. Effect of ascorbic acid
on urine pH in patients with injured spinal cords. Am J Hosp Pharm1980 ; 37:235–237.
246. Lee BB, Haran MJ, Hunt LM, et al. Spinal-injured neuropathic bladder
antisepsis (SINBA) trial. Spinal Cord 2007 ; 45:542–550.
247. Kuhlemeier KV , Stover SL, Lloyd LK. Prophylactic antibacterial ther-
apy for preventing urinary tract infections in spinal cord injury pa-tients. J Urol 1985 ; 134:514–517.
248. Kevorkian CG, Merritt JL, Ilstrup DM. Methenamine mandelate with
acidiﬁcation: an effective urinary antiseptic in patients with neuro-genic bladder. Mayo Clin Proc 1984 ; 59:523–529.
249. Lee BB, Simpson JM, Craig JC, et al. Methenamine hippurate for
preventing urinary tract infections. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2007 :
CD003265.
250. Knoff T. Methenamine hippurate. Short-term catheterization in gy-
necologic surgery. A double-blind comparison of Hiprex and placebo[in Norwegian]. Tidsskr Nor Laegeforen 1985 ; 105:498–499.
251. Schiotz HA, Guttu K. Value of urinary prophylaxis with methenamine
in gynecologic surgery. Acta Obstet Gynecol Scand 2002 ; 81:743–746.
252. Thomlinson J, Williams JD, Cope E. Persistence of bacteriuria fol-
lowing gynaecological surgery: a trial of methenamine hippurate. BrJU r o l 1968 ; 40:479–482.
253. Tyreman NO, Andersson PO, Kroon L, et al. Urinary tract infection
after vaginal surgery: effect of prophylactic treatment with methena-
mine hippurate. Acta Obstet Gynecol Scand 1986 ; 65:731–733.
254. Miller H, Phillips E. Antibacterial correlates of urine drug levels of
hexamethylenetetramine and formaldehyde. Invest Urol 1970 ; 8:21–33.
255. Jepson RG, Craig JC. Cranberries for preventing urinary tract infec-
tions. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2008 :CD001321.
256. Linsenmeyer TA, Harrison B, Oakley A, et al. Evaluation of cranberry
supplement for reduction of urinary tract infections in individualswith neurogenic bladders secondary to spinal cord injury: a pro-spective, double-blinded, placebo-controlled, crossover study. J SpinalCord Med 2004 ; 27:29–34.
257. Waites KB, Canupp KC, Armstrong S, et al. Effect of cranberry extract
on bacteriuria and pyuria in persons with neurogenic bladder sec-ondary to spinal cord injury. J Spinal Cord Med 2004 ; 27:35–40.258. Hess MJ, Hess PE, Sullivan MR, et al. Evaluation of cranberry tablets
for the prevention of urinary tract infections in spinal cord injured
patients with neurogenic bladder. Spinal Cord 2008 ; 46:622–626.
259. Burke JP , Garibaldi RA, Britt MR, et al. Prevention of catheter-as-
sociated urinary tract infections: efﬁcacy of daily meatal care regimens.Am J Med 1981 ; 70:655–658.
260. Burke JP , Jacobson JA, Garibaldi RA, et al. Evaluation of daily meatal
care with poly-antibiotic ointment in prevention of urinary catheter-associated bacteriuria. J Urol 1983 ; 129:331–334.
261. Marples RR, Kligman AM. Methods for evaluating topical antibac-
terial agents on human skin. Antimicrob Agents Chemother 1974 ;5 :
323–329.
262. Dudley MN, Barriere SL. Antimicrobial irrigations in the prevention
and treatment of catheter-related urinary tract infections. Am J HospPharm 1981 ; 38:59–65.
263. Davies AJ, Desai HN, Turton S, et al. Does instillation of chlorhexidine
into the bladder of catheterized geriatric patients help reduce bac-teriuria? J Hosp Infect 1987 ; 9:72–75.
264. Waites KB, Canupp KC, Roper JF, et al. Evaluation of 3 methods of
bladder irrigation to treat bacteriuria in persons with neurogenic blad-der. J Spinal Cord Med 2006 ; 29:217–226.
265. van den Broek PJ, Daha TJ, Mouton RP . Bladder irrigation with
povidone-iodine in prevention of urinary-tract infections associatedwith intermittent urethral catheterisation. Lancet 1985 ; 1:563–565.
266. Ball AJ, Carr TW, Gillespie WA, et al. Bladder irrigation with chlor-
hexidine for the prevention of urinary infection after transurethraloperations: a prospective controlled study. J Urol 1987 ; 138:491–494.
267. Richter S, Kotliroff O, Nissenkorn I. Single preoperative bladder in-
stillation of povidone-iodine for the prevention of postprostatectomybacteriuria and wound infection. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol1991 ; 12:579–582.
268. Mobley HL, Warren JW. Urease-positive bacteriuria and obstruction
of long-term urinary catheters. J Clin Microbiol 1987 ; 25:2216–2217.
269. Muncie HL Jr, Hoopes JM, Damron DJ, et al. Once-daily irrigation
of long-term urethral catheters with normal saline: lack of beneﬁt.Arch Intern Med 1989 ; 149:441–443.
270. Elliott TS, Reid L, Rao GG, et al. Bladder irrigation or irritation? Br
JU r o l 1989 ; 64:391–394.
271. Maizels M, Schaeffer AJ. Decreased incidence of bacteriuria associated
with periodic instillations of hydrogen peroxide into the urethral cath-eter drainage bag. J Urol 1980 ; 123:841–845.
272. Sweet DE, Goodpasture HC, Holl K, et al. Evaluation of H2O2 pro-
phylaxis of bacteriuria in patients with long-term indwelling Foleycatheters: a randomized, controlled study. Infect Control 1985 ; 6:263–
266.
273. Gillespie WA, Simpson RA, Jones JE, et al. Does the addition of dis-
infectant to urine drainage bags prevent infection in catheterised pa-tients? Lancet 1983 ; 1:1037–1039.
274. Reiche T, Lisby G, Jorgensen S, et al. A prospective, controlled, ran-
domized study of the effect of a slow-release silver device on the fre-quency of urinary tract infection in newly catheterized patients. BJUInt2000 ; 85:54–59.
275. Noy MF, Smith CA, Watterson LL. The use of chlorhexidine in cath-
eter bags. J Hosp Infect 1982 ; 3:365–367.
276. Suryaprakash B, Rao MS, Panigrahi D, et al. Formalin in the urinary
bag: a cheap measure to control infection in urology wards. Lancet
1984 ; 2:104–105.
277. Wazait HD, van der Meullen J, Patel HR, et al. Antibiotics on urethral
catheter withdrawal: a hit and miss affair. J Hosp Infect 2004 ; 58:297–
302.
278. Romanelli G, Giustina A, Cravarezza P , et al. A single dose of az-
treonam in the prevention of urinary tract infections in elderly cath-
eterized patients. J Chemother 1990 ; 2:178–181.
279. Wazait HD, Patel HR, van der Meulen JH, et al. A pilot randomized
double-blind placebo-controlled trial on the use of antibiotics onurinary catheter removal to reduce the rate of urinary tract infection:the pitfalls of ciproﬂoxacin. BJU Int 2004 ; 94:1048–1050.Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article/50/5/625/324341 by MUSC Library user on 12 November 2025

Urinary Catheter Guidelines •CID 2010:50 (1 March) •663280. Schneeberger PM, Vreede RW, Bogdanowicz JF, et al. A randomized
study on the effect of bladder irrigation with povidone-iodine before
removal of an indwelling catheter. J Hosp Infect 1992 ; 21:223–229.
281. Pfefferkorn U, Lea S, Moldenhauer J, et al. Antibiotic prophylaxis at
urinary catheter removal prevents urinary tract infections: a pro-spective randomized trial. Ann Surg 2009 ; 249:573–575.
282. Leone M, Perrin AS, Granier I, et al. A randomized trial of catheter
change and short course of antibiotics for asymptomatic bacteriuriain catheterized ICU patients. Intensive Care Med 2007 ; 33:726–729.
283. Warren JW, Anthony WC, Hoopes JM, et al. Cephalexin for suscep-
tible bacteriuria in afebrile, long-term catheterized patients. JAMA1982 ; 248:454–458.
284. Alling B, Brandberg A, Seeberg S, et al. Effect of consecutive anti-
bacterial therapy on bacteriuria in hospitalized geriatric patients.Scand J Infect Dis 1975 ; 7:201–207.
285. Waites KB, Canupp KC, DeVivo MJ. Eradication of urinary tract
infection following spinal cord injury. Paraplegia 1993 ; 31:645–652.
286. Maynard FM, Diokno AC. Urinary infection and complications dur-
ing clean intermittent catheterization following spinal cord injury. JUrol 1984 ; 132:943–946.
287. Lewis RI, Carrion HM, Lockhart JL, et al. Signiﬁcance of asymptom-
atic bacteriuria in neurogenic bladder disease. Urology 1984 ; 23:343–
347.
288. Ditunno JF Jr, Formal CS. Chronic spinal cord injury. N Engl J Med
1994 ; 330:550–556.
289. Screening for asymptomatic bacteriuria in adults: U.S. Preventive Ser-
vices Task Force reafﬁrmation recommendation statement. Ann In-tern Med 2008 ; 149:43–47.
290. Lin K, Fajardo K. Screening for asymptomatic bacteriuria in adults:
evidence for the U.S. Preventive Services Task Force reafﬁrmationrecommendation statement. Ann Intern Med 2008 ; 149:W20–W24.291. Gross PA, Patel B. Reducing antibiotic overuse: a call for a national
performance measure for not treating asymptomatic bacteriuria. Clin
Infect Dis 2007 ; 45:1335–1337.
292. Harding GK, Nicolle LE, Ronald AR, et al. How long should catheter-
acquired urinary tract infection in women be treated? A randomized,controlled study. Ann Intern Med 1991 ; 114:713–719.
293. Nicolle LE. A practical guide to antimicrobial management of com-
plicated urinary tract infection. Drugs Aging 2001 ; 18:243–254.
294. Dow G, Rao P , Harding G, et al. A prospective, randomized trial of
3 or 14 days of ciproﬂoxacin treatment for acute urinary tract infectionin patients with spinal cord injury. Clin Infect Dis 2004 ; 39:658–664.
295. Peterson J, Kaul S, Khashab M, et al. A double-blind, randomized
comparison of levoﬂoxacin 750 mg once-daily for ﬁve days with cip-roﬂoxacin 400/500 mg twice-daily for 10 days for the treatment ofcomplicated urinary tract infections and acute pyelonephritis. Urology2008 ; 71:17–22.
296. Warren JW, Abrutyn E, Hebel JR, et al. Guidelines for antimicrobial
treatment of uncomplicated acute bacterial cystitis and acute pyelo-nephritis in women. Infectious Diseases Society of America (IDSA).Clin Infect Dis 1999 ; 29:745–758.
297. Darouiche RO, Thornby JI, Cerra-Stewart C, et al. Bacterial inter-
ference for prevention of urinary tract infection: a prospective, ran-domized, placebo-controlled, double-blind pilot trial. Clin Infect Dis
2005 ; 41:1531–1534.
298. Beiko DT, Knudsen BE, Watterson JD, et al. Urinary tract biomaterials.
JU r o l 2004 ; 171:2438–2444.
299. Valle J, Da Re S, Henry N, et al. Broad-spectrum bioﬁlm inhibition
by a secreted bacterial polysaccharide. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2006 ;
103:12558–12563.Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/cid/article/50/5/625/324341 by MUSC Library user on 12 November 2025

