Table 1. Selected Validated Nutrition Screening Tools for Children and Infants2
Nutrition Screening Parameters PMST3 PNST4PYMS5STAMP6STRONGKIDS7
Appetite/intake X
Body mass index X X X
Weight change/loss X X X
Wt/Age, Wt/Length, Ht Velocity X X X X
Gl symptoms X
Medical condition, diagnosis, 
severity of disease or treatmentX X
Reduced intake due to pain X
Pre-existing intervention X
Visibly under- or overweight X
PMST , Pediatric Malnutrition Screening Tool; PNST , Pediatric Nutrition Screening Tool; PYMS , Pediatric Yorkhill Malnutrition score; STAMP , Screening Tool for the Assessment of 
Malnutrition; STRONGKIDS , Screening Tool for Risk on Nutritional Status and Growth. Note: Some tools incorporate actual measurements as part of the tool while others do not. See 
also: Pediatric Nutritional Screening Tools for Use in Hospitalized Children .The piece provides an overview of the nutrition screening, assessment, and diagnostic tools for children and 
infants. It can be used in conjunction with the ASPEN Pediatric Nutrition Care Pathway and other resources in the 
ASPEN Malnutrition Solution Center at nutritioncare.org/Malnutrition .  
Nutrition Screening
What is nutrition screening, and what tool should be used for screening?
• Nutrition screening is a process for identifying individuals who may be malnourished or at risk for malnutrition and 
determining whether they require a comprehensive nutrition assessment and appropriate intervention.1 
• Nutrition screening should be conducted within 24 hours of hospital admission.
• ASPEN suggests using a validated nutrition screening tool for pediatric patients. See Table 1.
Continues on next pageNeonates and Children Nutritionally-at-Risk for Undernutrition
Neonates should be considered at nutrition risk if they have any of the following:1,14
High Risk8
• Extremely Preterm: less than 28 weeks at birth.
• Extremely low birth weight: less than 1000 g at birth.
• Infant establishing feeds after episode of necrotizing 
enterocolitis or gastrointestinal perforation.
• Infants with severe congenital gastrointestinal  
malformations (e.g., gastroschisis).  
See Preterm and Neonatal Malnutrition Indicators on page 3. Moderate Risk8
• Preterm: 28th–31st weeks at birth, otherwise well.
• Intrauterine growth restriction. 
• Very low birth weight 1000–1500 g at birth.
• Illness or congenital anomaly that may compromise feeding.
• Low birth weight (less than 2500 g) at birth.9 
• Birth weight greater than 2 standard deviations below the mean 
(approximately the 3rd percentile) for gestational age on fetal 
weight curves.9 
• Decline in weight-for-age z score. 
• Weight gain velocity less than expected.
Children should be considered at nutrition risk if they have any of the following:1
• Weight for length, weight for height, by gender less than 
10th percentile (–1.28 z-score).10 
• BMI for age by gender less than 5th percentile  
(< –1.64 z-score).9
• Increased metabolic requirements (such as fever, 
hypermetabolism, chronic seizures).• Impaired ability to ingest or tolerate oral feeding.
• Documented inadequate provision of or tolerance to 
nutrients.
• Inadequate weight gain or a significant decrease in usual 
growth percentile.
PRACTICE TOOLKey Nutrition Screening, Assessment, and Malnutrition  
Diagnostic Processes and Tools for Children and Infants 
Malnutrition Diagnoses 
Pediatric malnutrition (undernutrition) is defined as an imbalance between nutrient requirement and intake, resulting in 
cumulative deficits of energy, protein, or micronutrients that may negatively affect growth, development, and other relevant 
outcomes. Based on its etiology, malnutrition is either illness-related (1 or more diseases/injuries directly result in nutrient 
imbalance) or caused by environmental/behavioral factors associated with decreased nutrient intake/delivery (or both). 
Pediatric malnutrition pertains to children aged 1 month to 18 years.12 See Table 2.
Table 2. Diagnostic Frameworks for Malnutrition in Children or Infants 
Indicators of MalnutritionAcademy and ASPEN 
(Pediatrics)13Preterm and 
Neonates14
Primary Indicators When a Single Data Point is Available
Weight-for-height z score X
BMI-for-age z score X
Length/height-for-age z score X
Mid–upper arm circumference X
Primary Indicators When 2 or More Data Points are Available 
Weight gain velocity (<2 years of age) X X
Weight loss (2–20 years of age) X
Deceleration in weight for length/height z score X
Inadequate nutrient intake X X
Decline in weight-for-age z score X
Days to regain birthweight X
Linear growth velocity X
Decline in length-for-age z score X
Continues on next pageNutrition Assessment
What is nutrition assessment, and what method or measure should be used to identify malnutrition? 
• Nutrition assessment is a comprehensive approach 
to identifying nutrition-related problems. It uses a 
combination of medical, nutrition, medication, and client 
histories; nutrition-focused physical examination (NFPE); 
anthropometric measurements; and biomedical data/
medical diagnostic tests and procedures.11 NFPE includes 
assessing:
 ∘Muscle, fat, and fluid assessment
 ∘Micronutrient deficiency review 
 ∘Functional status assessment
• Nutrition assessment is the next step after identifying 
nutritional risk through screening. 
• Nutrition assessment findings are then applied to a 
diagnostic framework to derive the malnutrition diagnosis.
PRACTICE TOOLKey Nutrition Screening, Assessment, and Malnutrition  
Diagnostic Processes and Tools for Children and Infants
This practice tool is supported by References
1.  American Society for Parenteral and Enteral Nutrition Definition of Terms, Style, and Conventions Used in ASPEN 
Board of Directors - Approved Documents, May 2018. 
2.  Academy Evidence Analysis Library. Nutrition Screening Pediatrics Systematic Review (2018-2019).    https://www.
andeal.org/topic.cfm?menu=5767&cat=5922  
3.  Thomas PC, Marino LV, Williams S A, Beattie RM. Outcome of nutritional screening in the acute paediatric setting. Arch 
Dis Child. 2016 Dec;101(12):1119-1124.
4.  White M, Lawson K, Ramsey R, et al. Simple nutrition screening tool for pediatric inpatients. JPEN J Parenter Enter Nutr. 
2016;40(3):392-398.
5.  Gerasimidis K, Keane O, Macleod I, Flynn DM, Wright CM. A four-stage evaluation of the Paediatric Yorkhill Malnutrition 
Score in a tertiary paediatric hospital and a district general hospital. Brit J Nutr. 2010;104(5):751-756.
6.  McCarthy H, Dixon M, Crabtree I, et al. The development and evaluation of the Screening Tool for the Assessment of 
Malnutrition in Paediatrics (STAMP©) for use by healthcare staff. J Hum Nutr Diet. 2012 Aug;25(4):311-8.
7.  Hulst JM, Zwart H, Hop WC, Joosten KF.Dutch national survey to test the STRONGkids nutritional risk screening tool in 
hospitalized children. Clin Nutr. 2010 Feb;29(1):106-11.
8.  Johnson MJ, Pearson F, Emm A, Moyses HE, Leaf AA. Developing a new screening tool for nutritional risk in neonatal 
intensive care. Acta Paediatricia 2015;104:e90-e93.
9.  Institute of Medicine. Anthropometric risk criteria. In: WIC Nutrition Risk Criteria: A Scientific Assessment. National 
Academies Press. 1996:67-148. http://books.nap.edu/openbook.php?record_id=5071&pg67.10. Centers for Disease Control. Use and interpretation of the CDC growth charts. http://www.cdc.gov/nccdphp/dnpa/
growthcharts/resources/growthchart.pdf.
11. Academy of Nutrition and Dietetics. Definition of terms list. 2017.
12. Mehta NM, et al Defining pediatric malnutrition: a paradigm shift toward etiology-related definitions JPEN J Parenter 
Enteral Nutr. July 2013; (37)4:460-481.
13. Becker P , Carney LN, Corkins M, et al. Consensus statement of the Academy of Nutrition and Dietetics/American 
Society for Parenteral and Enteral Nutrition: Indicators recommended for the identification and documentation of 
pediatric malnutrition (undernutrition). Nutr Clin Pract. 2015;30(1):147-161.
14. Goldberg DL, Becker PJ, Brigham K, et al. Identifying malnutrition in preterm and neonatal populations: 
Recommended indicators. J Acad Nutr Diet. 2018 Sep;118(9):1571-1582.
15. Goldberg DL, Becker PJ. Applying the recommended indicators for the diagnosis of preterm and neonatal malnutrition: 
Answers to frequently asked questions. Nutr Clin Pract 2022;37(1):50-58.
16. Guenter P , et al. Malnutrition diagnoses and associated outcomes in hospitalized patients: United States, 2018 Nutr. 
Clin. Pract.2021;36:957–969.
17. ASPEN. Improve Patient Outcomes: A.S.P .E.N.’s Step-by-Step Guide to Addressing Malnutrition, Improve Patient 
Outcomes. 2015. ASPEN, Silver Spring, MD.
18. Carvalho-Salemi J, Phillips W, Wong Vega M, Swanson J, Becker PJ, Salemi JL. Malnutrition among hospitalized 
children in the United States: A 2012-2019 update of annual trends. J Acad Nutr Diet. 2023 Jan;123(1):109-116.
Note: This content has been developed for use by healthcare professionals to inform other clinicians and/or patients/caregivers. ASPEN is making this content available for informational purposes only. This content 
is not based on ASPEN Board Approved documents and should not be confused with ASPEN clinical guidelines as it was not developed according to ASPEN guideline processes. Recommendations provided here do 
not constitute medical or other professional advice and should not be taken as such. To the extent that the information presented here may be used to assist in the care of patients, the primary component of quality 
medical care is the result of the professional judgment of the healthcare professionals providing care. The information presented here is not a substitute for the exercise of professional judgment by healthcare 
professionals. Circumstances and patient specifics in clinical settings may require actions different from those recommended in this document; in those cases, the judgment of the treating professional should 
prevail. Use of this information does not in any way guarantee any specific benefit in outcome or survival. This tool is intended to supplement, but not replace, professional training and judgment.Diagnostic Codes
ICD-10 CM Codes to Identify Medical Diagnosis of 
Malnutrition in Infants and Children  
This is the complete list of ICD-10 CM codes used for 
coding purposes.16,17 The highlighted codes are those 
used most often as of 2019.18  
Code Description
E40 Kwashiorkor
E41 Nutritional marasmus
E43 Unspecified severe protein-calorie 
malnutrition
E44.0 Moderate protein-calorie malnutrition
E44.1 Mild protein-calorie malnutrition
E46 Unspecified protein-calorie malnutrition
R62.51 Failure to thrive (child)
R63.3 Feeding difficulties
R63.4 Abnormal weight loss
R63.6 Underweight
R64 Cachexia
K91.2 Postsurgical malabsorption, not elsewhere 
classified
T74.02XA Child neglect or abandonment, confirmed, 
initial encounter
T74.02XD Child neglect or abandonment, confirmed, 
subsequent encounter
T74.02XS Child neglect or abandonment, confirmed, 
sequela
T76.02XA Child neglect or abandonment, suspected, 
initial encounter
T76.02XD Child neglect or abandonment, suspected, 
subsequent encounter
T76.02XS Child neglect or abandonment, suspected, 
sequela
Z68.51 Body mass index (BMI) pediatric, less than 
5th percentile for ageAcademy and ASPEN Consensus Criteria
The Academy of Nutrition and Dietetics (the Academy) and 
the American Society for Parenteral and Enteral Nutrition 
utilizing an evidence-informed, consensus-derived 
process, recommend that a standardized set of diagnostic 
indicators be used to identify and document pediatric 
malnutrition in routine clinical practice.13 
• When a single data point is available, the recommended 
indicators include z scores for weight-for-height/length, 
body mass index-for-age, or length/height-for-age or mid-
upper arm circumference. 
• When 2 or more data points are available, indicators 
may also include weight gain velocity (<2 years of age), 
weight loss (2–20 years of age), deceleration in weight 
for length/height z score, and inadequate nutrient intake.
Preterm and Neonates Malnutrition Indicators 
In 2018, a committee of expert preterm/neonatal 
registered dietitian nutritionists published recommended 
indicators for the diagnosis of malnutrition in preterm 
infants and neonates. This was in response to a need 
for indicators appropriate to the preterm/neonatal 
population, given the emphasis on diagnosing malnutrition 
in the pediatric and adult populations.14 A follow-up paper 
answers questions regarding the three categories of 
indicators, billing, and reimbursement.15
PRACTICE TOOL
© Copyright 2024 American Society for 
Parenteral and Enteral Nutrition | 07/30/24
LEADING THE SCIENCE AND PRACTICE OF CLINICAL NUTRITIONKey Nutrition Screening, Assessment, and Malnutrition  
Diagnostic Processes and Tools for Children and Infants
