2015 ACC/AHA/SCAI Focused Update
1135(Circulation. 2016;133:1135-1147. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000336.)
© 2015 by the American College of Cardiology Foundation, the American Heart Association, Inc., and the Society for Cardiovascular Angiography and 
Interventions.
Circulation is available at http://circ.ahajournals.org DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000336*Writing committee members are required to recuse themselves from voting on sections to which their specific relationships with industry may apply; see 
Appendixes 1 and 2 for detailed information. †ACC/AHA Representative. ‡SCAI Representative. §ACC/AHA Task Force on Clinical Practice Guidelines Liaison. ║Dr. Deborah D. Ascheim accepted a position at Capricor Therapeutics in August 2015, after the writing effort was completed. In accordance with 
ACC/AHA policy, she recused herself from the final voting process. ¶ACP Representative. #ACEP Representative. **Former Task Force member; current member during the writing effort.
This document was approved by the American College of Cardiology Board of Trustees and Executive Committee, the American Heart Association 
Science Advisory and Coordinating Committee, and the Society of Cardiovascular Angiography and Interventions in September 2015, and by the American Heart Association Executive Committee in October 2015.
The online-only Comprehensive RWI Data Supplement table is available with this article at http://circ.ahajournals.org/lookup/suppl/
doi:10.1161/CIR.0000000000000336/-/DC1.
The online-only Data Supplement is available with this article at http://circ.ahajournals.org/lookup/suppl/doi:10.1161/CIR.0000000000000336/-/DC2.The American Heart Association requests that this document be cited as follows: Levine GN, O’Gara PT, Bates ER, Blankenship JC, Kushner FG, Ascheim DD, 
Bailey SR, Bittl JA, Brindis RG, Casey DE Jr, Cercek B, Chambers CE, Chung MK, de Lemos JA, Diercks DB, Ellis SG, Fang JC, Franklin BA, Granger CB, Guyton RA, Hollenberg SM, Khot UN, Krumholz HM, Lange RA, Linderbaum JA, Mauri L, Mehran R, Morrow DA, Moussa ID, Mukherjee D, Newby LK, Ornato JP, Ou N, Radford MJ, Tamis-Holland JE, Ting HH, Tommaso CL, Tracy CM, Woo YJ, Zhao DX. 2015 ACC/AHA/SCAI focused update on primary percutaneous coronary intervention for patients with ST-elevation myocardial infarction: an update of the 2011 ACCF/AHA/SCAI guideline for percutaneous coronary intervention and the 2013 ACCF/AHA guideline for the management of ST-elevation myocardial infarction: a report of the American College of Cardiology/American Heart Association Task Force on Clinical Practice Guidelines and the Society for Cardiovascular Angiography and Interventions. Circulation. 2016;133:1135–1147.
This article has been copublished in the Journal of the American College of Cardiology and Catheterization and Cardiovascular Interventions.Copies: This document is available on the World Wide Web sites of the American College of Cardiology (www.acc.org), the American Heart Association 
(my.americanheart.org), and the Society for Cardiovascular Angiography and Interventions (www.scai.org). A copy of the document is available at http://professional.heart.org/statements by using either “Search for Guidelines & Statements” or the “Browse By Topic” area. To purchase additional reprints, call 843-216-2533 or e-mail kelle.ramsay@wolterskluwer.com.
Expert peer review of AHA Scientific Statements is conducted by the AHA Office of Science Operations. For more on AHA statements and guidelines 
development, visit http://professional.heart.org/statements. Select the “Guidelines & Statements” drop-down menu, then click “Publication Development.”
Permissions: Multiple copies, modification, alteration, enhancement, and/or distribution of this document are not permitted without the express 
permission of the American Heart Association. Instructions for obtaining permission are located at http://www.heart.org/HEARTORG/General/Copyright-Permission-Guidelines_UCM_300404_Article.jsp. A link to the “Copyright Permissions Request Form” appears on the right side of the page.2015 ACC/AHA/SCAI Focused Update on Primary Percutaneous 
Coronary Intervention for Patients With ST-Elevation Myocardial 
Infarction: An Update of the 2011 ACCF/AHA/SCAI Guideline 
for Percutaneous Coronary Intervention and the 2013 ACCF/AHA 
Guideline for the Management of ST-Elevation Myocardial Infarction
A Report of the American College of Cardiology/American Heart Association  
Task Force on Clinical Practice Guidelines and the Society for  
Cardiovascular Angiography and Interventions
Endorsed by the Latin American Society of Interventional Cardiology
PCI WRITING COMMITTEE*
Glenn N. Levine, MD, FACC, FAHA, Chair† ; Eric R. Bates, MD, FACC, FAHA, FSCAI, Vice Chair*†;  
James C. Blankenship, MD, FACC, FAHA, FSCAI, Vice Chair*‡; Steven R. Bailey, MD, FACC, FSCAI*‡;  
John A. Bittl, MD, FACC†; Bojan Cercek, MD, FACC, FAHA†; Charles E. Chambers, MD, FACC, FSCAI‡;  
Stephen G. Ellis, MD, FACC*†; Robert A. Guyton, MD, FACC§ ; Steven M. Hollenberg, MD, FACC*†;  
Umesh N. Khot, MD, FACC*†; Richard A. Lange, MD, FACC, FAHA†; Laura Mauri, MD, MSc, FACC, FSCAI*†;  
Roxana Mehran, MD, FACC, FAHA, FSCAI*‡; Issam D. Moussa, MD, FACC, FAHA, FSCAI‡;  
Debabrata Mukherjee, MD, FACC, FAHA, FSCAI†; Henry H. Ting, MD, FACC, FAHA†
STEMI WRITING COMMITTEE* 
Patrick T. O’Gara, MD, FACC, FAHA, Chair†; Frederick G. Kushner, MD, FACC, FAHA, FSCAI, Vice Chair†;  
Deborah D. Ascheim, MD, FACC║ ; Ralph G. Brindis, MD, MPH, MACC, FSCAI, FAHA§; Donald E. Casey, Jr, MD, MPH, MBA, FAHA¶ ;  
Mina K. Chung, MD, FACC, FAHA*†; James A. de Lemos, MD, FACC*†; Deborah B. Diercks, MD, MSc#;  
James C. Fang, MD, FACC, FAHA*†; Barry A. Franklin, PhD, FAHA†; Christopher B. Granger, MD, FACC, FAHA*†;  
Harlan M. Krumholz, MD, SM, FACC, FAHA*†; Jane A. Linderbaum, MS, CNP-BC†; David A. Morrow, MD, MPH, FACC, FAHA*†;  
L. Kristin Newby, MD, MHS, FACC, FAHA*†; Joseph P. Ornato, MD, FACC, FAHA, FACP, FACEP*†; Narith Ou, PharmD†;  
Martha J. Radford, MD, FACC, FAHA†; Jacqueline E. Tamis-Holland, MD, FACC, FSCAI† ; Carl L. Tommaso, MD, FACC, FAHA, MSCAI‡;  
Cynthia M. Tracy, MD, FACC, FAHA†; Y . Joseph Woo, MD, FACC, FAHA†; David X. Zhao, MD, FACC*†
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on November 12, 2025

1136  Circulation  March 15, 2016
Table of Contents
Preamble ..................................... 1136
1. Introduction ................................. 1137
 1.1. Methodology and Evidence Review .......... 1137
 1.2. Organization of the GWC .................. 1137
 1.3. Review and Approval ..................... 1137
2. Culprit Artery–Only Versus Multivessel PCI ....... 1137
3. Aspiration Thrombectomy ...................... 1139
References .................................... 1140
Appendix 1.  Author Relationships With Industry  
and Other Entities (Relevant) ........... 1142
Appendix 2.  Author Relationships With Industry  and Other Entities (Relevant) ........... 1143
Appendix 3.  Reviewer Relationships With Industry  and Other Entities (Relevant)—2015  Focused Update on Primary Percutaneous 
Coronary Intervention for Patients With 
ST-Elevation Myocardial Infarction  (Combined Peer Reviewers From  2011 PCI and 2013 STEMI Guidelines) ....1145
Preamble
To ensure that guidelines reflect current knowledge, avail-
able treatment options, and optimum medical care, existing 
clinical practice guideline recommendations are modified and 
new recommendations are added in response to new data, 
medications or devices. To keep pace with evolving evidence, 
the American College of Cardiology (ACC)/American Heart Association (AHA) Task Force on Clinical Practice Guidelines 
(“Task Force”) has issued this focused update to revise guide-
line recommendations on the basis of recently published data. 
This update is not based on a complete literature review from 
the date of previous guideline publications, but it has been 
subject to rigorous, multilevel review and approval, similar to 
the full guidelines. For specific focused update criteria and additional methodological details, please see the ACC/AHA 
guideline methodology manual.
1
Modernization
In response to published reports from the Institute of Medicine2,3  
and ACC/AHA mandates,4–7 processes have changed leading to 
adoption of a “knowledge byte” format. This entails delineation  
of recommendations addressing specific clinical questions, fol-
lowed by concise text, with hyperlinks to supportive evidence. This approach better accommodates time constraints on busy 
clinicians, facilitates easier access to recommendations via 
electronic search engines and other evolving technology (eg, 
smart phone apps), and supports the evolution of guidelines as 
“living documents” that can be dynamically updated as needed.
Intended Use
Practice guidelines provide recommendations applicable to patients with or at risk of developing cardiovascular dis-ease. The focus is on medical practice in the United States, but guidelines developed in collaboration with other organi-zations may have a broader target. Although guidelines may inform regulatory or payer decisions, they are intended to improve quality of care in the interest of patients.
Class of Recommendation and Level of Evidence
The Class of Recommendation (COR) and Level of Evidence (LOE) are derived independently of one another according to established criteria. The COR indicates the strength of recommendation, encompassing the estimated magnitude and certainty of benefit of a clinical action in proportion to risk. The LOE rates the quality of scientific evidence sup-porting the intervention on the basis of the type, quantity, 
and consistency of data from clinical trials and other sources 
(Table 1).
1,7,8
Relationships With Industry and Other Entities
The ACC and AHA sponsor the guidelines without commer -
cial support, and members volunteer their time. The Task Force zealously avoids actual, potential, or perceived conflicts of interest that might arise through relationships with indus-try or other entities (RWI). All Guideline Writing Committee 
(GWC) members and reviewers are required to disclose 
current industry relationships or personal interests from 12 
months before initiation of the writing effort. Management 
of RWI involves selecting a balanced GWC and assuring that 
the chair and a majority of committee members have no rele-
vant RWI (Appendixes 1 and 2). Members are restricted with regard to writing or voting on sections to which their RWI apply. For transparency, members’ comprehensive disclosure 
information is available online. Comprehensive disclosure 
information for the Task Force is also available online. The 
Task Force strives to avoid bias by selecting experts from a broad array of backgrounds representing different geographic ACC/AHA TASK FORCE MEMBERS 
Jonathan L. Halperin, MD, FACC, FAHA, Chair; Glenn N. Levine, MD, FACC, FAHA, Chair-Elect;  
Jeffrey L. Anderson, MD, FACC, FAHA, Immediate Past Chair**; Nancy M. Albert, PhD, RN, FAHA**;  
Sana M. Al-Khatib, MD, MHS, FACC, FAHA; Kim K. Birtcher, PharmD, MS, AACC;  
Biykem Bozkurt, MD, PhD, FACC, FAHA; Ralph G. Brindis, MD, MPH, MACC;  
Joaquin E. Cigarroa, MD, FACC; Lesley H. Curtis, PhD, FAHA;  
Lee A. Fleisher, MD, FACC, FAHA; Federico Gentile, MD, FACC; Samuel Gidding, MD, FAHA; 
 Mark A. Hlatky, MD, FACC; John Ikonomidis, MD, PhD, FAHA; Jose Joglar, MD, FACC, FAHA;  
Richard J. Kovacs, MD, FACC, FAHA**; E. Magnus Ohman, MD, FACC**;  
Susan J. Pressler, PhD, RN, FAHA; Frank W. Sellke, MD, FACC, FAHA**;  
Win-Kuang Shen, MD, FACC, FAHA**; Duminda N. Wijeysundera, MD, PhD
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on November 12, 2025

Levine et al  2015 ACC/AHA/SCAI Focused Update on Primary PCI  1137
regions, sexes, ethnicities, intellectual perspectives/biases,  
and scopes of clinical practice, and by inviting organizations 
and professional societies with related interests and expertise to participate as partners or collaborators.
Related Issues
For additional information pertaining to the methodol-ogy for grading evidence, assessment of benefit and harm, shared decision making between the patient and clinician, structure of evidence tables and summaries, standardized terminology for articulating recommendations, organi-zational involvement, peer review, and policies for peri-
odic assessment and updating of guideline documents, we encourage readers to consult the ACC/AHA guideline methodology manual.
1
The recommendations in this focused update represent the 
official policy of the ACC and AHA until superseded by pub-lished addenda, statements of clarification, focused updates, or revised full-text guidelines. To ensure that guidelines remain current, new data are reviewed biannually to determine whether recommendations should be modified. In general, full revisions are posted in 5-year cycles.
1
Jonathan L. Halperin, MD, FACC, FAHA
Chair, ACC/AHA Task Force on Clinical Practice Guidelines
1. Introduction
The scope of this focused update is limited to considerations relevant to multivessel percutaneous coronary intervention (PCI) and thrombus aspiration in patients with ST-elevation myocardial infarction (STEMI) undergoing primary PCI.
1.1. Methodology and Evidence Review
Clinical trials presented at the major cardiology organizations’  
2013 to 2015 annual scientific meetings and other selected reports published in a peer-reviewed format through August 2015 were reviewed by the 2011 PCI and 2013 STEMI GWCs and the Task Force to identify trials and other key data that might affect guideline recommendations. The information considered important enough to prompt updated recommen-dations is included in evidence tables in the Online Data Supplement.
Consult the full-text versions of the 2011 PCI and  
2013 STEMI guidelines
9,10 for recommendations in clini-
cal areas not addressed in the focused update. The indi-vidual recommendations in this focused update will be 
incorporated into future revisions or updates of the full-text guidelines.
1.2. Organization of the GWC
For this focused update, representative members of the 2011 PCI and 2013 STEMI GWCs were invited to participate. Members were required to disclose all RWI relevant to the topics under consideration. The entire membership of both GWCs voted on the revised recommendations and text. The latter group was composed of experts representing cardiovascular medicine, interventional cardiology, electrophysiology, heart failure, cardiac surgery, emergency medicine, internal medicine, car -
diac rehabilitation nursing, and pharmacy. The GWC included representatives from the ACC, AHA, American College of 
Physicians, American College of Emergency Physicians, and 
Society for Cardiovascular Angiography and Interventions 
(SCAI).
1.3. Review and Approval
This document was reviewed predominantly by the prior reviewers from the respective 2011 and 2013 guidelines. These included 8 official reviewers jointly nominated by the 
ACC and AHA, 4 official/organizational reviewers nominated 
by SCAI, and 25 individual content reviewers. Reviewers’ RWI information was distributed to the GWC and is published in this document (Appendix 3).
This document was approved for publication by the govern-
ing bodies of the ACC, the AHA, and the SCAI and was endorsed 
by the Latin American Society of Interventional Cardiology.
2. Culprit Artery–Only Versus Multivessel PCI
(See Section 5.2.2.2 of 2011 PCI guideline and Section 4.1.1 
of 2013 STEMI guideline for additional recommendations.)
Approximately 50% of patients with STEMI have multi-
vessel disease.25,26 PCI options for patients with STEMI and 
multivessel disease include: 1) culprit artery–only primary PCI, with PCI of nonculprit arteries only for spontaneous isch-emia or intermediate- or high-risk findings on predischarge 
noninvasive testing; 2) multivessel PCI at the time of primary 
PCI; or 3) culprit artery–only primary PCI followed by staged PCI of nonculprit arteries. Observational studies, randomized controlled trials (RCTs), and meta-analyses comparing culprit artery–only PCI with multivessel PCI have reported conflict-ing results,
11,12,14–24,27,28 likely because of differing inclusion 
criteria, study protocols, timing of multivessel PCI, statistical heterogeneity, and variable endpoints (Data Supplement).
Previous clinical practice guidelines recommended against 
PCI of nonculprit artery stenoses at the time of primary PCI in hemodynamically stable patients with STEMI.
9,10 Planning 
for routine, staged PCI of noninfarct artery stenoses on the basis of the initial angiographic findings was not addressed in these previous guidelines, and noninfarct artery PCI was 
considered only in the limited context of spontaneous isch-
emia or high-risk findings on predischarge noninvasive test-ing. The earlier recommendations were based in part on safety concerns, which included increased risks for procedural com-plications, longer procedural time, contrast nephropathy, and stent thrombosis in a prothrombotic and proinflammatory 
state,
9,10 and in part on the findings from many observational 
studies and meta-analyses of trends toward or statistically sig-
nificant worse outcomes in those who underwent  multivessel 
primary PCI.12–16,21–23
Four RCTs have since suggested that a strategy of multi-
vessel PCI, either at the time of primary PCI or as a planned, staged procedure, may be beneficial and safe in selected patients with STEMI
17,18,24,27 (Data Supplement). In the PRAMI 
(Preventive Angioplasty in Acute Myocardial Infarction) trial (n=465),
24 the composite primary outcome of cardiac death, 
nonfatal myocardial infarction (MI), or refractory angina 
occurred in 21 patients (9%) treated with multivessel primary 
PCI, compared with 53 patients (22%) treated with culprit 
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on November 12, 2025

1138  Circulation  March 15, 2016
artery–only PCI (HR: 0.35; 95% CI: 0.21 to 0.58; P<0.001). 
In the CvLPRIT (Complete Versus Culprit-Lesion Only 
Primary PCI) trial,18 296 patients were randomized to culprit 
artery–only or multivessel PCI during the index hospitaliza-
tion (72% underwent multivessel primary PCI). The compos-
ite primary outcome of death, reinfarction, heart failure, and ischemia-driven revascularization at 12 months occurred in 
15 patients (10%) who underwent multivessel PCI, compared with 31 patients (21%) receiving culprit artery–only PCI (HR: 0.49; 95% CI: 0.24 to 0.84; P=0.009). In the DANAMI 3 
PRIMULTI (Third Danish Study of Optimal Acute Treatment of Patients with ST-segment Elevation Myocardial Infarction) 
trial,
17 the composite primary outcome of all-cause death, 
nonfatal MI, or ischemia-driven revascularization of non-
culprit artery disease occurred in 40 of 314 patients (13%) 
who underwent multivessel staged PCI guided by angiogra-phy and fractional flow reserve before discharge, versus 68 of 
313 patients (22%) treated with culprit artery–only PCI (HR: 
0.56; 95% CI: 0.38 to 0.83; P=0.004). In the PRAGUE-13 (Primary Angioplasty in Patients Transferred From General 
Community Hospitals to Specialized PTCA Units With or 
Without Emergency Thrombolysis) trial,
27 214 patients with Table 1. Applying Class of Recommendation and Level of Evidence to Clinical Strategies, Interventions, Treatments, or Diagnostic 
Testing in Patient Care* (Updated August 2015)
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on November 12, 2025

Levine et al  2015 ACC/AHA/SCAI Focused Update on Primary PCI  1139
STEMI were randomized to staged (3 to 40 days after the index 
procedure) revascularization of all ≥70% diameter stenosis 
noninfarct lesions or culprit-only PCI. Preliminary results at 
38 months’ mean follow-up showed no between-group differ -
ences in the composite primary endpoint of all-cause death, 
nonfatal MI, and stroke.
On the basis of these findings,17,18,24,27 the prior Class III 
(Harm) recommendation with regard to multivessel primary PCI in hemodynamically stable patients with STEMI has 
been upgraded and modified to a Class IIb recommendation to include consideration of multivessel PCI, either at the time of primary PCI or as a planned, staged procedure. The writ-
ing committee emphasizes that this change should not be 
interpreted as endorsing the routine performance of multives-
sel PCI in all patients with STEMI and multivessel disease. 
Rather, when considering the indications for and timing of 
multivessel PCI, physicians should integrate clinical data, lesion severity/complexity, and risk of contrast nephropathy 
to determine the optimal strategy.
The preceding discussion and recommendations apply to 
the strategy of routine PCI of noninfarct related arteries in hemodynamically stable patients. Recommendations in the 
2013 STEMI guideline with regard to PCI of a non–infarct-related artery at a time separate from primary PCI in patients who have spontaneous symptoms and myocardial ischemia 
or who have intermediate- or high-risk findings on noninva-
sive testing (Section 6.3 of that guideline) remain operative.
Although several observational studies
19,20 and a network 
meta-analysis13 have suggested that multivessel staged PCI 
may be associated with better outcome than multivessel 
primary PCI, there are insufficient observational data and 
no randomized data at this time to inform a recommenda-tion with regard to the optimal timing of nonculprit vessel 
PCI. Additional trial data that will help further clarify this 
issue are awaited. Issues related to the optimal method of evaluating nonculprit lesions (eg, percent diameter stenosis, 
fractional flow reserve) are beyond the scope of this focused 
update.
3. Aspiration Thrombectomy
(See Section 5.5.2 of the 2011 PCI guideline and Section 4.2 of the 2013 STEMI guideline for additional 
recommendations.)The 2011 PCI and 2013 STEMI guidelines’
9,10 Class IIa 
recommendation for aspiration thrombectomy before primary 
PCI was based on the results of 2 RCTs29,31,32 and 1 meta-anal-
ysis30 and was driven in large measure by the results of TAPAS 
(Thrombus Aspiration During Primary Percutaneous Coronary Intervention in Acute Myocardial Infarction Study), a single-
center study that randomized 1071 patients with STEMI to 
aspiration thrombectomy before primary PCI or primary PCI 
only.
29,32 Three multicenter trials, 2 of which enrolled signifi-
cantly more patients than prior aspiration thrombectomy tri-
als, have prompted reevaluation of this recommendation. In the INFUSE-AMI (Intracoronary Abciximab and Aspiration 
Thrombectomy in Patients With Large Anterior Myocardial 
Infarction) trial
37 of 452 patients with anterior STEMI due to 
proximal or mid-left anterior descending occlusion, infarct size was not reduced by aspiration thrombectomy before primary PCI. The TASTE (Thrombus Aspiration During ST-Segment 
Elevation Myocardial Infarction) trial (n=7244) incorporated 
a unique design that allowed randomization within an exist-ing national registry, resulting in enrollment of a remarkably high proportion of eligible patients.
34,36 No significant 30-day or 
1-year differences were found between the group that received 
aspiration thrombectomy before primary PCI and the group 
that received primary PCI only with regard to death, reinfarc-tion, stent thrombosis, target lesion revascularization, or a com-posite of major adverse cardiac events. The TOTAL (Trial of Routine Aspiration Thrombectomy With PCI Versus PCI Alone in Patients With STEMI) trial randomized 10,732 patients with 
STEMI to aspiration thrombectomy before primary PCI or pri-
mary PCI only.
35 Bailout thrombectomy was performed in 7.1% 
of the primary PCI–only group, whereas the rate of crossover from aspiration thrombectomy before primary PCI to primary PCI only was 4.6%. There were no differences between the 2 
treatment groups, either in the primary composite endpoint of 
cardiovascular death, recurrent MI, cardiogenic shock, or New 
York Heart Association class IV heart failure at 180 days, or in the individual components of the primary endpoint, stent 
thrombosis, or target-vessel revascularization. There was a 
small but statistically significant increase in the rate of stroke in 2013 
Recommendation2015 Focused Update 
Recommendation Comment
Class III: Harm Class IIb
PCI should not be performed in a noninfarct artery at the time of primary PCI in patients with STEMI who are hemodynamically stable.
11–13 (Level of 
Evidence: B)PCI of a noninfarct artery may be considered in selected patients with STEMI and multivessel disease who are hemodynamically stable, either at the time of primary PCI or as a planned staged procedure.
11–24 (Level of 
Evidence: B-R)Modified recommendation (changed class from “III: Harm” to “IIb” and expanded time frame in which multivessel PCI could be performed).
PCI indicates percutaneous coronary intervention; and STEMI, ST-elevation 
myocardial infarction.
2011/2013 Recommendation2015 Focused Update 
Recommendations Comments
Class IIa Class IIb
Manual aspiration thrombectomy is reasonable for patients undergoing primary PCI.
29–32 
(Level of  Evidence: B)The usefulness of selective and bailout aspiration thrombectomy in patients undergoing primary PCI is not well established.
33–37 
(Level of Evidence: C-LD)Modified recommendation (Class changed from “IIa” to “IIb” for selective and bailout aspiration thrombectomy before PCI).
Class III: No Benefit
Routine aspiration 
thrombectomy before primary PCI is not useful.
33–37 (Level of 
Evidence: A)New recommenda-tion (“Class III: No Benefit” added for routine aspiration thrombectomy before PCI).
PCI indicates percutaneous coronary intervention; and LD, limited data.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on November 12, 2025

1140  Circulation  March 15, 2016
the aspiration thrombectomy group. An updated meta-analysis 
that included these 3 trials among a total of 17 trials (n=20 960) 
found no significant reduction in death, reinfarction, or stent thrombosis with routine aspiration thrombectomy. Aspiration thrombectomy was associated with a small but nonsignificant 
increase in the risk of stroke.
33
Several previous studies have found that higher thrombus 
burden in patients with STEMI is independently associated with higher risks of distal embolization, no-reflow phenom-
enon, transmural myocardial necrosis, major adverse cardiac events, stent thrombosis, and death.
38–42 However, subgroup 
analyses from the TASTE and TOTAL trials did not suggest rel-
ative benefit from aspiration thrombectomy before primary PCI 
in patients with higher thrombus burden or in patients with ini-tial Thrombolysis in Myocardial Infarction (TIMI) flow grade 
0–1 or left anterior descending artery/anterior infarction.
34,35
On the basis of the results of these studies, the prior Class 
IIa recommendation for aspiration thrombectomy has been 
changed. Routine aspiration thrombectomy before primary 
PCI is now not recommended (Class III: No Benefit, LOE A). There are insufficient data to assess the potential benefit 
of a strategy of selective or bailout aspiration thrombectomy 
(Class IIb, LOE C-LD). “Bailout” aspiration thrombectomy is defined as thrombectomy that was initially unplanned but 
was later used during the procedure because of unsatisfactory 
initial result or procedural complication, analogous to the defi-nition of “bailout” glycoprotein IIb/IIIa use.
It should be noted that the preceding recommendations 
and text apply only to aspiration thrombectomy; no clini-cal benefit for routine rheolytic thrombectomy has been 
demonstrated in patients with STEMI undergoing primary 
PCI.
30,43,44
Presidents and Staff
American College of Cardiology
Kim A. Williams, Sr, MD, FACC, FAHA, PresidentShalom Jacobovitz, Chief Executive Officer
William J. Oetgen, MD, MBA, FACC, Executive Vice 
President, Science, Education, Quality, and Publications
Amelia Scholtz, PhD, Publications Manager, Science, 
Education, and Quality
American College of Cardiology/American Heart 
Association
Lisa Bradfield, CAE, Director, Science and Clinical Policy
Abdul R. Abdullah, MD, Associate Science and Medicine 
Advisor
Allison Rabinowitz, Project Manager, Science and Clinical 
Policy
American Heart Association
Mark A. Creager, MD, FAHA, FACC, PresidentNancy Brown, Chief Executive Officer
Rose Marie Robertson, MD, FAHA, Chief Science Officer
Gayle R. Whitman, PhD, RN, FAHA, FAAN, Senior Vice 
President, Office of Science Operations
Jody Hundley, Production Manager, Scientific Publications, 
Office of Science OperationsReferences
 1. ACCF/AHA Task Force on Practice Guidelines. Methodology Manual 
and Policies From the ACCF/AHA Task Force on Practice Guidelines. American College of Cardiology and American Heart Association. 2010. Available at: http://assets.cardiosource.com/Methodology_Manual_for_ACC_AHA_Writing_Committees.pdf and http://my.americanheart.org/idc/groups/ahamah-public/@wcm/@sop/documents/downloadable/ucm_319826.pdf. Accessed January 23, 2015.
 2. Committee on Standards for Developing Trustworthy Clinical Practice Guidelines, Institute of Medicine (US). Clinical Practice Guidelines We Can Trust. Washington, DC: National Academies Press; 2011.
 3. Committee on Standards for Systematic Reviews of Comparative Effectiveness Research, Institute of Medicine (US). Finding What Works in Health Care: Standards for Systematic Reviews. Washington, DC: National Academies Press; 2011.
 4. Anderson JL, Heidenreich PA, Barnett PG, et al. ACC/AHA statement on cost/value methodology in clinical practice guidelines and performance measures: a report of the American College of Cardiology/American Heart Association Task Force on Performance Measures and Task Force on Practice Guidelines. Circulation. 2014;129:2329–45.
 5. Arnett DK, Goodman RA, Halperin JL, et al. AHA/ACC/HHS strategies to enhance application of clinical practice guidelines in patients with car -
diovascular disease and comorbid conditions: from the American Heart Association, American College of Cardiology, and U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. Circulation. 2014;130:1662–7.
 6. Jacobs AK, Kushner FG, Ettinger SM, et al. ACCF/AHA clinical practice guideline methodology summit report: a report of the American College of Cardiology Foundation/American Heart Association Task Force on Practice Guidelines. Circulation. 2013;127:268–310.
 7. Jacobs AK, Anderson JL, Halperin JL. The evolution and future of ACC/
AHA clinical practice guidelines: a 30-year journey: a report of the American College of Cardiology/American Heart Association Task Force on Practice Guidelines. Circulation. 2014;130:1208–17.
 8. Halperin JL, Levine GN, Al-Khatib SM, et al. Further evolution of the ACC/
AHA clinical practice guideline recommendation classification system: a report of the American College of Cardiology/American Heart Association Task Force on Clinical Practice Guidelines [published online ahead of print September 23, 2015]. Circulation. doi:10.1161/CIR.0000000000000312. Accessed December 7, 2015.
 9. Levine GN, Bates ER, Blankenship JC, et al. 2011 ACCF/AHA/
SCAI guideline for percutaneous coronary intervention: a report of the American College of Cardiology Foundation/American Heart Association Task Force on Practice Guidelines and the Society for Cardiovascular Angiography and Interventions. Circulation. 2011;124:e574–651.
 10. O’Gara PT, Kushner FG, Ascheim DD, et al. 2013 ACCF/AHA guideline 
for the management of ST-elevation myocardial infarction: a report of the American College of Cardiology Foundation/American Heart Association Task Force on Practice Guidelines. Circulation. 2013;127:529–55.
 11. Hannan EL, Samadashvili Z, Walford G, et al. Culprit vessel percutaneous 
coronary intervention versus multivessel and staged percutaneous coro-nary intervention for ST-segment elevation myocardial infarction patients with multivessel disease. JACC Cardiovasc Interv. 2010;3:22–31.
 12. Toma M, Buller CE, Westerhout CM, et al. Non-culprit coronary artery percu-taneous coronary intervention during acute ST-segment elevation myocardial infarction: insights from the APEX-AMI trial. Eur Heart J. 2010;31:1701–7.
 13. Vlaar PJ, Mahmoud KD, Holmes DR Jr, et al. Culprit vessel only versus mul-tivessel and staged percutaneous coronary intervention for multivessel disease  
in patients presenting with ST-segment elevation myocardial infarction: a pairwise and network meta-analysis. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2011;58:692–703.
 14. Cavender MA, Milford-Beland S, Roe MT, et al. Prevalence, predictors, and in-
hospital outcomes of non-infarct artery intervention during primary percutane-ous coronary intervention for ST-segment elevation myocardial infarction (from the National Cardiovascular Data Registry). Am J Cardiol. 2009;104:507–13.
 15. Corpus RA, House JA, Marso SP, et al. Multivessel percutaneous coronary 
intervention in patients with multivessel disease and acute myocardial infarction. Am Heart J. 2004;148:493–500.
 16. Dziewierz A, Siudak Z, Rakowski T, et al. Impact of multivessel coronary 
artery disease and noninfarct-related artery revascularization on outcome of patients with ST-elevation myocardial infarction transferred for pri-
mary percutaneous coronary intervention (from the EUROTRANSFER 
Registry). Am J Cardiol. 2010;106:342–7.
 17. Engstrøm T, Kelbæk H, Helqvist S, et al. Complete revascularisation versus treatment of the culprit lesion only in patients with ST-segment elevation myocardial infarction and multivessel disease (DANAMI 3-PRIMULTI): an open-label, randomised controlled trial. Lancet. 2015;386:665–71.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on November 12, 2025

Levine et al  2015 ACC/AHA/SCAI Focused Update on Primary PCI  1141
 18. Gershlick AH, Khan JN, Kelly DJ, et al. Randomized trial of complete 
versus lesion-only revascularization in patients undergoing primary per -
cutaneous coronary intervention for STEMI and multivessel Disease: the CvLPRIT trial. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2015;65:963–72.
 19. Kornowski R, Mehran R, Dangas G, et al. Prognostic impact of staged ver -
sus “one-time” multivessel percutaneous intervention in acute myocardial 
infarction: analysis from the HORIZONS-AMI (harmonizing outcomes with revascularization and stents in acute myocardial infarction) trial. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2011;58:704–11.
 20. Manari A, Varani E, Guastaroba P, et al. Long-term outcome in patients 
with ST segment elevation myocardial infarction and multivessel disease treated with culprit-only, immediate, or staged multivessel percutaneous revascularization strategies: insights from the REAL registry. Catheter Cardiovasc Interv. 2014;84:912–22.
 21. Politi L, Sgura F, Rossi R, et al. A randomised trial of target-vessel versus  
multi-vessel revascularisation in ST-elevation myocardial infarction: major adverse cardiac events during long-term follow-up. Heart. 2010;96:662–7.
 22. Roe MT, Cura FA, Joski PS, et al. Initial experience with multivessel per -
cutaneous coronary intervention during mechanical reperfusion for acute 
myocardial infarction. Am J Cardiol. 2001;88:170–3, A6.
 23. Varani E, Balducelli M, Aquilina M, et al. Single or multivessel percutane-
ous coronary intervention in ST-elevation myocardial infarction patients. Catheter Cardiovasc Interv. 2008;72:927–33.
 24. Wald DS, Morris JK, Wald NJ, et al. Randomized trial of preventive angio-
plasty in myocardial infarction. N Engl J Med. 2013;369:1115–23.
 25. Sorajja P, Gersh BJ, Cox DA, et al. Impact of multivessel disease on 
reperfusion success and clinical outcomes in patients undergoing primary percutaneous coronary intervention for acute myocardial infarction. Eur Heart J. 2007;28:1709–16.
 26. Park D-W, Clare RM, Schulte PJ, et al. Extent, location, and clinical sig-
nificance of non-infarct-related coronary artery disease among patients with ST-elevation myocardial infarction. JAMA. 2014;312:2019–27.
 27. Hlinomaz O. Multivessel coronary disease diagnosed at the time of pri-
mary PCI for STEMI: complete revascularization versus conservative 
strategy. PRAGUE 13 trial. Available at: http://sbhci.org.br/wp-content/uploads/2015/05/PRAGUE-13-Trial.pdf. Accessed September 10, 2015.
 28. Vlaar PJ, Mahmoud KD, Holmes DR, Jr., et al. Culprit vessel only versus mul-
tivessel and staged percutaneous coronary intervention for multivessel dis-
ease in patients presenting with ST-segment elevation myocardial infarction: a pairwise and network meta-analysis. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2011;58:692–703.
 29. Vlaar PJ, Svilaas T, van der Horst IC, et al. Cardiac death and reinfarc-
tion after 1 year in the Thrombus Aspiration during Percutaneous coro-nary intervention in Acute myocardial infarction Study (TAPAS): a 1-year follow-up study. Lancet. 2008;371:1915–20.
 30. Bavry AA, Kumbhani DJ, Bhatt DL. Role of adjunctive thrombectomy and 
embolic protection devices in acute myocardial infarction: a comprehen-
sive meta-analysis of randomized trials. Eur Heart J. 2008;29:2989–3001.
 31. Sardella G, Mancone M, Bucciarelli-Ducci C, et al. Thrombus aspiration 
during primary percutaneous coronary intervention improves myocardial reperfusion and reduces infarct size: the EXPIRA (thrombectomy with export 
catheter in infarct-related artery during primary percutaneous coronary inter -
vention) prospective, randomized trial. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2009;53:309–15.
 32. Svilaas T, Vlaar PJ, van der Horst IC, et al. Thrombus aspiration dur -
ing primary percutaneous coronary intervention. N Engl J Med. 
2008;358:557–67.
 33. Elgendy IY , Huo T, Bhatt DL, et al. Is aspiration thrombectomy beneficial 
in patients undergoing primary percutaneous coronary intervention? Meta-
analysis of randomized trials. Circ Cardiovasc Interv. 2015;8:e002258.
 34. Fröbert O, Lagerqvist B, Olivecrona GK, et al. Thrombus aspiration 
during ST-segment elevation myocardial infarction. N Engl J Med. 
2013;369:1587–97.
 35. Jolly SS, Cairns JA, Yusuf S, et al. Randomized trial of primary PCI with or 
without routine manual thrombectomy. N Engl J Med. 2015;372:1389–98.
 36. Lagerqvist B, Fröbert O, Olivecrona GK, et al. Outcomes 1 year 
after thrombus aspiration for myocardial infarction. N Engl J Med. 
2014;371:1111–20.
 37. Stone GW, Maehara A, Witzenbichler B, et al. Intracoronary abciximab 
and aspiration thrombectomy in patients with large anterior myocardial infarction: the INFUSE-AMI randomized trial. JAMA. 2012;307:1817–26.
 38. Napodano M, Dariol G, Al Mamary AH, et al. Thrombus burden and myo-
cardial damage during primary percutaneous coronary intervention. Am J 
Cardiol. 2014;113:1449–56.
 39. Sianos G, Papafaklis MI, Daemen J, et al. Angiographic stent thrombosis after 
routine use of drug-eluting stents in ST-segment elevation myocardial infarc-tion: the importance of thrombus burden. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2007;50:573–83.
 40. Yip HK, Chen M-C, Chang H-W, et al. Angiographic morphologic fea-
tures of infarct-related arteries and timely reperfusion in acute myocardial infarction: predictors of slow-flow and no-reflow phenomenon. Chest. 2002;122:1322–32.
 41. Brener SJ, Dambrink J-H, Maehara A, et al. Benefits of optimising coro-
nary flow before stenting in primary percutaneous coronary intervention 
for ST-elevation myocardial infarction: insights from INFUSE-AMI. 
EuroIntervention. 2014;9:1195–201.
 42. Costa RA, Abizaid A, Lotan C, et al. Impact of thrombus burden on out-
comes after standard versus mesh-covered stents in acute myocardial 
infarction (from the MGuard for acute ST elevation reperfusion trial). Am 
J Cardiol. 2015;115:161–6.
 43. Ali A, Cox D, Dib N, et al. Rheolytic thrombectomy with percutane-
ous coronary intervention for infarct size reduction in acute myocardial 
infarction: 30-day results from a multicenter randomized study. J Am Coll 
Cardiol. 2006;48:244–52.
 44. Migliorini A, Stabile A, Rodriguez AE, et al. Comparison of AngioJet rhe-
olytic thrombectomy before direct infarct artery stenting with direct stent-
ing alone in patients with acute myocardial infarction. The JETSTENT 
trial. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2010;56:1298–306.
K
EY WORDS : AHA Scientific Statements ◼ culprit vessel ◼ focused update 
◼ multivessel ◼ myocardial infarction ◼ primary PCI ◼ thrombectomy
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on November 12, 2025

1142  Circulation  March 15, 2016
Appendix 1. Author Relationships With Industry and Other Entities (Relevant)—2015 ACC/AHA/SCAI Focused Update on Primary 
Percutaneous Coronary Intervention for Patients With ST-Elevation Myocardial Infarction (Percutaneous Coronary Intervention 
Writing Committee) (November 2014)
Committee  
Member Employer/Title ConsultantSpeakers 
BureauOwnership/
Partnership/
PrincipalPersonal 
ResearchInstitutional, 
Organizational or Other 
Financial BenefitExpert 
WitnessVoting  
Recusals by 
Section*
Glenn N. Levine, ChairBaylor College of Medicine—Professor of Medicine;  Director, Cardiac Care UnitNone None None None None None None
Eric R. Bates,  Vice ChairUniversity of Michigan—Professor of Medicine•  Merck•  Sanofi-aventisNone None None None None 2 and 3
James C. Blankenship,  Vice ChairGeisinger Medical Center—Director of Cardiology and Cardiac Catheterization LaboratoriesNone None None •  Abbott 
Vascular†
•  Abiomed†•  Boston 
Scientific†
•  Volcano†None None 2 and 3
Steven R. Bailey University of Texas  Medical Center—Professor  of Medicine and RadiologyNone None None None None None None
John A. Bittl Munroe Heart—Interventional CardiologistNone None None None None None None
Bojan Cercek Cedars-Sinai Medical Center—Director, Coronary Care UnitNone None None None None None None
Charles E.  ChambersPenn State Milton S. Hershey Medical Center—Professor  of Medicine and RadiologyNone None None None None None None
Stephen G. Ellis Cleveland Clinic Foundation—Section Head, Invasive and Interventional Cardiology•  Abbott•  Boston Scientific•  MedtronicNone None None None None 2 and 3
Robert A. Guyton Emory Clinic, Inc.—Professor and Chief, Division of Cardiothoracic Surgery•  Medtronic‡ None None None None None 2 and 3
Steven M.  HollenbergCooper Medical School of Rowan University—Professor of MedicineNone None None None None None None
Umesh N. Khot Cleveland Clinic—Vice Chairman, Department of Cardiovascular Medicine•  AstraZeneca None None None None None None
Richard A. Lange Texas Tech University Health Sciences Center El Paso—PresidentNone None None None None None None
Laura Mauri Brigham & Women’s  Hospital—Associate Professor  
of Medicine, Harvard Medical School•  Medtronic•  St. Jude MedicalNone None None •  Abbott‡•  Boston Scientific‡•  Bristol-Myers 
Squibb‡
•  Cordis‡•  Medtronic 
Cardiovascular‡
•  Sanofi-aventis‡None 2 and 3
Roxana Mehran Columbia University Medical Center—Associate Professor of Medicine; Director, Data Coordinating Analysis Center•  Abbott Vascular•  Boston Scientific•  Janssen  
(Johnson & Johnson)‡
•  Merck•  Sanofi-aventis‡None None •  BMS/Sanofi-aventis‡
•  Regado•  STENTYS†None None 2 and 3
Issam D. Moussa University of Central  Florida College of Medicine—  
Professor of Medicine; First Coast Cardiovascular Institute—Chief Medical  OfficerNone None None None None None None
(Continued )
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on November 12, 2025

Levine et al  2015 ACC/AHA/SCAI Focused Update on Primary PCI  1143
Debabrata  
MukherjeeTexas Tech University—Chief, Cardiovascular MedicineNone None None None None None None
Henry H. Ting New York–Presbyterian Hospital, The University Hospital of Columbia and Cornell—Senior Vice President and Chief Quality OfficerNone None None None None None None
This table represents the relationships of committee members with industry and other entities that were determined to be relevant to this document. These 
relationships were reviewed and updated in conjunction with all meetings and/or conference calls of the writing committee during the document development process. 
The table does not necessarily  reflect relationships  with industry at the time of publication.  A person is deemed to have a significant  interest in a business if the interest 
represents ownership of ≥5% of the voting stock or share of the business entity, or ownership of ≥$5 000 of the fair market value of the business entity; or if funds 
received by the person from the business entity exceed 5% of the person’s gross income for the previous year. Relationships that exist with no financial benefit are also included for the purpose of transparency. Relationships in this table are modest unless otherwise noted.
According  to the ACC/AHA,  a person has a relevant relationship IF: a) the relationship or interest relates to the same or similar subject matter, intellectual property 
or asset, topic, or issue addressed in the document; or b) the company/entity (with whom the relationship exists) makes a drug, drug class, or device addressed in the document, or makes a competing drug or device addressed in the document; or c) the person or a member of the person’s household has a reasonable potential for financial, professional, or other personal gain or loss as a result of the issues/content addressed in the document.
*Writing group members are required to recuse themselves from voting on sections to which their specific relationships with industry and other entities may apply.†No financial benefit.‡Significant relationship.ACC indicates American College of Cardiology; AHA, American Heart Association; and SCAI, Society for Cardiovascular Angiography and Interventions.Appendix 1. Continued
Committee  
Member Employer/Title ConsultantSpeakers 
BureauOwnership/
Partnership/
PrincipalPersonal 
ResearchInstitutional, 
Organizational or Other 
Financial BenefitExpert 
WitnessVoting  
Recusals by 
Section*
(Continued )Appendix 2. Author Relationships With Industry and Other Entities (Relevant)—2015 ACC/AHA/SCAI Focused Update on Primary 
Percutaneous Coronary Intervention for Patients With ST-Elevation Myocardial Infarction (ST-Elevation Myocardial Infarction Writing 
Committee) (February 2014)
Committee 
Member Employment ConsultantSpeakers 
BureauOwnership/
Partnership/
Principal Personal ResearchInstitutional, 
Organizational or 
Other Financial 
BenefitExpert 
WitnessVoting  
Recusals by 
Section*
Patrick T. O’Gara, ChairHarvard Medical School—Professor of MedicineNone None None None None None None
Frederick G. Kushner,  
Vice ChairTulane University School of 
Medicine—Clinical Professor 
of Medicine; Heart Clinic of 
Louisiana—Medical DirectorNone None None None None None None
Deborah  
D. Ascheim†Mount Sinai School of Medicine—Associate Professor; InCHOIR—
Clinical Director of ResearchNone None None None None None None
Ralph G.  BrindisUCSF Philip R. Lee Institute for Health Policy Studies—Clinical 
Professor of MedicineNone None None None None None None
Donald E.  Casey, Jr.Thomas Jefferson College of Population Health—Adjunct  
Faculty; Alvarez & Marsal IPO4Health—Principal  
and FounderNone None None None None None None
Mina K.  ChungCleveland Clinic Foundation—Professor of Medicine•  Boston Scientific§•  Medtronic§
•  St. Jude Medical§None None •  Biosense Webster§
•  Boston Scientific§
•  Medtronic§
•  St. Jude Medical‡None None 2 and 3
James A.  
de LemosUT Southwestern Medical  Center—Professor of Medicine•  Abbott 
Diagnostics
•  Novo Nordisc•  St. Jude MedicalNone None •  Abbott Diagnostics‡ None None 2 and 3
Deborah B. DiercksUT Southwestern Medical  Center—Audre and Bernard 
Rapoport Distinguished Chair 
in Clinical Care and Research; Department of Emergency 
Medicine—Professor and ChairNone None None None None None None
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on November 12, 2025

1144  Circulation  March 15, 2016
James C.  
FangUniversity of Utah— Cardiovascular Division•  Boston Scientific None None None None None 2 and 3
Barry A.  FranklinWilliam Beaumont Hospital—Director, Cardiac Rehabilitation  
and Exercise LaboratoriesNone None None None None None None
Christopher  B. GrangerDuke Clinical Research  Institute—Director, Cardiac  
Care Unit; Professor of MedicineNone None None •  Medtronic 
Foundation‡
•  Merck‡None None 2 and 3
Harlan M. 
KrumholzYale University School of Medicine—Professor of 
Epidemiology and Public HealthNone None None •  Johnson & Johnson‡
•  Medtronic‡None None 2 and 3
Jane A. 
LinderbaumMayo Clinic—Assistant  Professor of MedicineNone None None None None None None
David A.  MorrowHarvard Medical School—Professor of Medicine•  Abbott•  MerckNone None •  Abbott‡•  GlaxoSmithKline‡•  Johnson & Johnson‡
•  Merck‡None None 2 and 3
L. Kristin  
NewbyDuke University Medical  Center, Division of Cardiology—
Professor of Medicine•  Philips None None •  Merck‡ None None 2 and 3
Joseph P.  
OrnatoDepartment of Emergency Medicine Virginia  
Commonwealth University— 
Professor and ChairmanNone None None None None None None
Narith Ou Mayo Clinic—Pharmacotherapy Coordinator, CardiologyNone None None None None None None
Martha J. 
RadfordNYU Langone Medical Center—Chief Quality Officer; NYU School  
of Medicine—Professor of 
Medicine (Cardiology)None None None None None None None
Jacqueline E. Tamis-HollandMount Sinai Saint Luke’s Hospital and The Icahn School of Medicine—
Program Director, Interventional 
Cardiology Fellowship ProgramNone None None None None None None
Carl L.  
TommasoSkokie Hospital—Director of Catheterization Laboratory; 
NorthShore University 
HealthSystems—PartnerNone None None None None None None
Cynthia M.  TracyGeorge Washington University Medical Center—Associate 
Director, Division of CardiologyNone None None None None None None
Y. Joseph  
WooStanford University—Professor  and Chair, Cardiothoracic SurgeryNone None None None None None None
David X.  
ZhaoWake Forest Baptist Health—Professor of Medicine, Heart and 
Vascular Center of Excellence 
DirectorNone None None •  St. Jude Medical§•  Medtronic§None None 2 and 3
This table represents the relationships of committee members with industry and other entities that were determined to be relevant to this document. These 
relationships were reviewed and updated in conjunction with all meetings and/or conference calls of the writing committee during the document development process. 
The table does not necessarily  reflect relationships  with industry at the time of publication.  A person is deemed to have a significant  interest in a business if the interest 
represents ownership of ≥5% of the voting stock or share of the business entity, or ownership of ≥$5 000 of the fair market value of the business entity; or if funds 
received by the person from the business entity exceed 5% of the person’s gross income for the previous year. Relationships that exist with no financial benefit are also included for the purpose of transparency. Relationships in this table are modest unless otherwise noted.
According  to the ACC/AHA,  a person has a relevant relationship IF: a) the relationship or interest relates to the same or similar subject matter, intellectual property 
or asset, topic, or issue addressed in the document; or b) the company/entity (with whom the relationship exists) makes a drug, drug class, or device addressed in the document, or makes a competing drug or device addressed in the document; or c) the person or a member of the person’s household has a reasonable potential for financial, professional, or other personal gain or loss as a result of the issues/content addressed in the document.
*Writing group members are required to recuse themselves from voting on sections to which their specific relationships with industry and other entities may apply.†Dr. Deborah D. Ascheim accepted a position at Capricor Therapeutics  in August 2015, after the writing effort was completed.  According  to policy, she recused herself 
from the final voting process.
‡Significant relationship.§No financial benefit.ACC indicates American College of Cardiology;  AHA, American Heart Association;  NYU, New York University; UCSF, University of California San Francisco; and UT, University of Texas.Appendix 2. Continued
Committee 
Member Employment ConsultantSpeakers 
BureauOwnership/
Partnership/
Principal Personal ResearchInstitutional, 
Organizational or 
Other Financial 
BenefitExpert 
WitnessVoting  
Recusals by 
Section*
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on November 12, 2025

Levine et al  2015 ACC/AHA/SCAI Focused Update on Primary PCI  1145
Appendix 3. Reviewer Relationships With Industry and Other Entities (Relevant)—2015 ACC/AHA/SCAI Focused Update on Primary 
Percutaneous Coronary Intervention for Patients With ST-Elevation Myocardial Infarction (Combined Peer Reviewers From 2011 PCI 
and 2013 STEMI Guidelines)
Reviewer Representation Employment ConsultantSpeakers  
BureauOwnership/
Partnership/
PrincipalPersonal  
ResearchInstitutional, 
Organizational or 
Other Financial 
BenefitExpert 
Witness
Elliott M.  
AntmanOfficial Reviewer—AHA Harvard Medical School—Professor of Medicine, 
Associate Dean for Clinical 
and Translational ResearchNone None None None None None
Deepak L.  BhattOfficial Reviewer—AHA Harvard Medical School—Professor; Interventional Cardiovascular Programs—
Executive DirectorNone None None •  Bristol-Myers 
Squibb*
•  Ischemix*
•  Medtronic*
•  St. Jude 
Medical•  Regado 
Biosciences†None
Christopher P. 
CannonOfficial Reviewer—AHA Harvard Medical School—Professor of 
Medicine; Brigham and Women’s Hospital—Senior 
Investigator, TIMI Study 
Group, Cardiovascular 
Division•  Bristol-Myers Squibb
•  Merck
•  Regeneron/Sanofi-aventis*None None •  Merck* None None
Joaquin E. CigarroaOfficial Reviewer— ACC/AHA Task Force on 
Clinical Practice GuidelinesOregon Health & Science 
University—Clinical 
Professor of MedicineNone None None None None None
George  DangasOfficial Reviewer—ACC Board of TrusteesIcahn School of Medicine—Professor of Cardiology and Vascular Surgery; Mount 
Sinai Medical Center—
Director, Cardiovascular 
Innovation•  Abbott
•  Biosensors•  Boston Scientific
•  Johnson & Johnson*
•  Merck
•  Osprey Medical*
•  Regado BiosciencesNone None None •  Abbott
•  Medtronic•  OspreyNone
Charles J. 
DavidsonOfficial Reviewer—SCAI Northwestern University Feinberg School of 
Medicine—Professor of 
Medicine, Director of  
Cardiac Catheterization LabNone None None •  Baxter 
International†None None
Kirk N. Garratt Official Reviewer—SCAI Hofstra University Medical 
School—Associate Chair 
of Quality and Research; 
Professor of Medicine•  Abbott•  Boston Scientific
•  The Medicines  
Company
•  Daiichi-Sankyo/
Eli Lilly
•  AstraZenecaNone•  LifeCuff 
Technologies
•  Global 
Delivery 
SystemsNone •  Boston 
ScientificNone
Steven L. GoldbergOfficial Reviewer—SCAI University of Washington Medical Center—Cath Lab 
Director•  Terumo† None None None None None
G. B. John 
ManciniOfficial Reviewer—ACC Board of GovernorsVancouver Hospital  Research Pavilion—
Professor of Medicine•  Merck
•  Sanofi-aventis/
RegeneronNone None None None None
Jonathan M. 
TobisOfficial Reviewer—SCAI University of California Los Angeles—Professor of 
Medicine and Cardiology•  St. Jude Medical None None None None None
Jeffrey L. 
AndersonContent Reviewer— ACC/AHA Task Force on 
Clinical Practice GuidelinesIntermountain Medical 
Center—Associate Chief of 
CardiologyNone None None None None None
Thomas M. 
BashoreContent Reviewer Duke University—Professor of MedicineNone None None None None None
James A.  BurkeContent Reviewer—ACC Interventional Scientific 
CouncilLehigh Valley Heart 
Specialists—Associate  
Chief, Division of CardiologyNone None None None None None
Jeffrey J. 
CavendishContent Reviewer—ACC Prevention of 
Cardiovascular Disease 
CommitteeKaiser Permanente Cardiology—Interventional 
CardiologistNone None None None •  Abbott None
(Continued )
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on November 12, 2025

1146  Circulation  March 15, 2016
Gregory J. 
DehmerContent Reviewer—ACC Appropriate Use CriteriaTexas A&M College of Medicine—Professor of 
Medicine; Scott & White 
HealthcareNone None None None None None
John S.  Douglas, Jr.Content Reviewer Emory University Hospital—Professor of MedicineNone None None •  Abbott•  MedtronicNone None
John P. 
Erwin IIIContent Reviewer— ACC/AHA Task Force on 
Performance MeasuresTexas A&M College of 
Medicine—Associate 
Professor; Scott & White 
Healthcare—Vice Chair of 
the Department of MedicineNone None None None None None
T. Bruce 
FergusonContent Reviewer—ACC Surgeons’ Scientific 
CouncilEast Carolina Institute 
Brody School of Medicine—
Professor of Surgery and 
PhysiologyNone None None None None None
Anthony GershlickContent Reviewer University Hospitals of Leicester, Department of 
Cardiology•  Abbott
•  Boston Scientific
•  Cordis
•  Medtronic•  Abbott† None None None None
Jonathan L. HalperinContent Reviewer— ACC/AHA Task Force on 
Clinical Practice  GuidelinesMt. Sinai Medical— 
Professor of Medicine•  Bayer Healthcare•  Boston Scientific
•  Johnson & Johnson
•  MedtronicNone None None None None
Howard C. 
HerrmannContent Reviewer University of Pennsylvania Perelman School of 
Medicine—Professor 
of Medicine, Director of Interventional Cardiology 
Program•  Seimens Medical
•  St. Jude MedicalNone None •  Abbott*•  Medtronic
•  Siemens 
Medical*
•  St. Jude 
MedicalNone None
Morton J.  
KernContent Reviewer University of California Irvine—Professor of Medicine, Associate Chief of  
the Division of Cardiology•  Acist Medical•  Merit Medical*•  St. Jude 
Medical*None None None None
Fred M. 
KosumotoContent Reviewer Mayo Clinic—Director, Pacing and Electrophysiology 
ServiceNone None None None None None
David J. 
MaronContent Reviewer Stanford University School of Medicine—Professor of 
Medicine and Emergency 
MedicineNone None None None None None
Douglass A. 
MorrisonContent Reviewer University of Arizona—Professor of Medicine; 
Southern Arizona VA  
Health Care System—
Cardiac Catheterization 
Laboratories, DirectorNone None None None None None
Manesh R. PatelContent Reviewer—ACC Appropriate Use CriteriaDuke University Medical Center—Associate  Professor of Medicine•  Bayer Healthcare*•  Janssen 
Pharmaceuticals*None None •  Johnson & 
Johnson*None None
M. Eugene 
ShermanContent Reviewer—ACC Board of GovernorsAurora Denver Cardiology None None None None •  Bristol-Myers  
Squibb*
•  Hospira*None
Daniel I. 
SimonContent Reviewer University Hospitals Case Medical Center—Professor  
of Cardiovascular Research•  Cordis/Johnson & 
Johnson*
•  Janssen 
Pharmaceuticals/
Johnson & Johnson
•  Medtronic Vascular
•  Merck•  Abbott None None None None
(Continued )Appendix 3.  Continued
Reviewer Representation Employment ConsultantSpeakers  
BureauOwnership/
Partnership/
PrincipalPersonal  
ResearchInstitutional, 
Organizational or 
Other Financial 
BenefitExpert 
Witness
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on November 12, 2025

Levine et al  2015 ACC/AHA/SCAI Focused Update on Primary PCI  1147
Richard W. 
SnyderContent Reviewer—ACC Board of GovernorsHeartPlace None None None None None None
William A. Tansey IIIContent Reviewer Summit Medical Group—CardiologistNone None None None None None
David D.  WatersContent Reviewer San Francisco General Hospital—Chief, Division  of CardiologyNone None None None •  Merck None
Patrick L. WhitlowContent Reviewer Cleveland Clinic Foundation—Director, 
Interventional CardiologyNone None None •  Abbott •  Medtronic*
David O. 
WilliamsContent Reviewer Harvard Medical School—Professor of Medicine; 
Brigham and Women’s 
HospitalNone None None None None None
Clyde W. YancyContent Reviewer— ACC/AHA Task Force on 
Practice GuidelinesNorthwestern University 
Feinberg School of 
Medicine—Vice Dean for 
Diversity and Inclusion,  
Chief of Medicine-
Cardiology, ProfessorNone None None None None None
Yerem 
YeghiazariansContent Reviewer University of California San Francisco—Associate 
ProfessorNone None None None None None
This table represents the relationships of reviewers with industry and other entities that were disclosed at the time of peer review and determined to be relevant to 
this document.  It does not necessarily  reflect relationships  with industry at the time of publication.  A person is deemed to have a significant  interest in a business if the 
interest represents ownership of ≥5% of the voting stock or share of the business entity, or ownership of ≥$5 000 of the fair market value of the business entity; or if 
funds received by the person from the business entity exceed 5% of the person’s gross income for the previous year. A relationship  is considered  to be modest if it is 
less than significant under the preceding definition. Relationships that exist with no financial benefit are also included for the purpose of transparency. Relationships in 
this table are modest unless otherwise noted. Names are listed in alphabetical order within each category of review.
According  to the ACC/AHA,  a person has a relevant relationship IF: a) the relationship or interest relates to the same or similar subject matter, intellectual property 
or asset, topic, or issue addressed in the document; or b) the company/entity (with whom the relationship exists) makes a drug, drug class, or device addressed in the document, or makes a competing drug or device addressed in the document; or c) the person or a member of the person’s household has a reasonable potential for financial, professional, or other personal gain or loss as a result of the issues/content addressed in the document.
*Significant relationship.†No financial benefit.ACC indicates American  College of Cardiology;  AHA, American  Heart Association;  HF, heart failure; SCAI, Society for Cardiovascular  Angiography  and Interventions; 
STEMI, ST-elevation myocardial infarction; PCI, percutaneous coronary interventions; TIMI, Thrombolysis In Myocardial Infarction; and VA, Veterans Affairs.Appendix 3.  Continued
Reviewer Representation Employment ConsultantSpeakers  
BureauOwnership/
Partnership/
PrincipalPersonal  
ResearchInstitutional, 
Organizational or 
Other Financial 
BenefitExpert 
Witness
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on November 12, 2025

