SPECIAL ARTICLE
The DSM-5: classiﬁcation and criteria changes
DARREL A. R EGIER1,EMILYA. K UHL1,DAVIDJ. K UPFER2
1American Psychiatric Association, Division of Research, Arlington, VA, USA; 2Department of Psychiatry, University of Pittsburgh Medical Center,
Pittsburgh, PA, USA
The Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, Fifth Edition (DSM-5) marks the ﬁrst signiﬁcant revision of the publication
since the DSM-IV in 1994. Changes to the DSM were largely informed by advancements in neuroscience, clinical and public health need,and identiﬁed problems with the classiﬁcation system and criteria put forth in the DSM-IV. Much of the decision-making was also driven by
a desire to ensure better alignment with the International Classiﬁcation of Diseases and its upcoming 11th edition (ICD-11). In this paper,
we describe select revisions in the DSM-5, with an emphasis on changes projected to have the greatest clinical impact and those that demon-
strate efforts to enhance international compatibility, including integration of cultural context with diagnostic criteria and changes that facil i-
tate DSM-ICD harmonization. It is anticipated that this collaborative spirit between the American Psychiatric Association (APA) and the
World Health Organization (WHO) will continue as the DSM-5 is updated further, bringing the ﬁeld of psychiatry even closer to a singular,
cohesive nosology.
Key words: DSM-5, ICD-11, diagnosis, classiﬁcation
(World Psychiatry 2013;12:92–98)
The Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders
(DSM) provides the standard language by which clinicians,
researchers, and public health ofﬁcials in the United Statescommunicate about mental disorders. The current edition of
the DSM, the ﬁfth revision (DSM-5) (1), was published in
May 2013, marking the ﬁrst major overhaul of diagnostic cri-teria and classiﬁcation since the DSM-IV in 1994 (2).
Historically, the World Health Organization (WHO) has
offered its own system of mental disorder classiﬁcation inChapter V of the International Classiﬁcation of Diseases
(ICD), largely used for reimbu rsement purposes and compil-
ing national and international health statistics. However, fol-lowing a 1982 international conference on mental disorder
classiﬁcation in Copenhagen ( 3), there was worldwide agree-
ment for the ICD to adopt more explicit diagnostic criteria todeﬁne mental disorders that adhered to the 1980 model of
DSM-III (4). What followed was a decade of consultation
between the American Psychiatric Association (APA) devel-opers of the DSM-IV and the WHO developers of the ICD-
10, that was facilitated by a coo perative agreement between
the National Institute of Me ntal Health and the WHO (5).
Although the ofﬁcial ICD-10 (6) contains only a brief
deﬁnition of each disorder, the WHO Division of Mental
Health obtained an agreement with the APA to publishsimilar Diagnostic Criteria for Research (7) to those in the
DSM-IV, as well as more general Clinical Descriptions and
Diagnostic Guidelines (8) as part of the ICD-10 Classiﬁca-tion of Mental and Behavioural Disorders. Having similar
but separate research criteria resulted in a major interna-
tional convergence of clinical practice communication andresearch on mental disorders – although the seemingly
slight differences in diagnostic criteria for research did pro-
duce some differences in prevalence rates and correlates ofmental disorders (9,10). Based on this experience, the latest
DSM-5 and ICD-11 development p rocesses offered a further
opportunity to not only advance the ﬁeld in terms of diagnos-tic utility and validity, but to also increase compatibility withICD-11 clinical guidelines and the global psychiatric commu-
nity at large.
DEVELOPMENT OF THE DSM-5
Details of the research development and the review and ap-
proval process for DSM-5 are de scribed elsewhere (1,11-14);
but brieﬂy, the DSM-5 was constructed with the goal of
addressing limitations in the DS M-IV while integrating the lat-
est scientiﬁc and clinical evidence on the empirical basis of
psychiatric disorders. The prio rity was to ensure the best care
of patients possible and, in the process, improve usability forclinicians and researchers. Through the contribution of more
than 400 experts from 13 countries, representing disciplines of
psychiatry, psychology, neurology, pediatrics, primary care,epidemiology, research methodology and statistics, a series of
13 international research conferences was held (2003–2008),
in cooperation with the WHO Division of Mental Health andSubstance Abuse – with support from a 5-year National Insti-
tutes of Health (NIH) cooperative agreement with the Ameri-
can Psychiatric Institute for Research and Education, theresearch component of the APA (15). The resulting mono-
graphs were produced to identify gaps in the then-current
nosology and diagnostic criteria, providing a starting pointfrom where members of the DSM-5 Task Force and Work
Groups would begin building their proposals for DSM-5.
One of these monographs, jointly produced by the APA
and the WHO, was speciﬁcally fo c u s e do np u b l i ch e a l t hc o n -
siderations in psychiatric diag nosis and classiﬁcation in the
United States and internation ally (16), but nearly all of the
monographs included explicit discussion of cultural implica-
tions of assessment and nosology , including cultural inﬂuen-
ces on the expression of anxiety and depression (17), the clas-siﬁcation of psychotic disorders in Western and non-Western
countries (18), and socio-cultural factors relevant to somatic
syndromes (19). The addition al monographs developed
92 World Psychiatry 12:2 - June 2013

under this cooperative agreement were used by the speciﬁc
Work Groups responsible for the relevant disorders covered(20-25).
Membership in the DSM-5 Task Force and Work Groups
was determined in part by the range of knowledge needed andalso by diversity of representation. Nearly every DSM-5 Work
Group included at least one international member. To ensure
that cultural factors were included in early revision proposals,a DSM-5 Culture and Gender Study Group was appointed to
provide guidelines for the Work Group literature reviews and
data analyses that served as the empirical rationale for draftchanges. Recommendations to the Work Groups included
consideration of possible evidence of racial, ethnic, or gender
bias in diagnostic criteria; the emergence of new data aboutgender or cultural differences, like discrepancies in prevalence
or symptom presentations; and the presence of gaps in the lit-
erature signaling the need for ﬁe ld trial testing or secondary
data analyses. Given his unique knowledge of international
diagnostic issues from his leadership of the ICD-10 develop-
ment, the former Director of WHO’s Division of MentalHealth, Norman Sartorius, w as nominated and served as an
international consultant to the DSM-5 Task Force.
Although the subﬁeld of transcultural psychiatry has ﬁrmly
established the relevance of culture and social context to
individual help-seeking behavior s, clinical presentation, and
response to treatment, the DSM leadership recognized thatthese issues would only increase in importance for both clinical
care and research applications. As the social environment
becomes more strongly linked to epigenetic mechanisms, herit-ability, disease risk, and resilie ncy factors, attention to these
matters in the DSM-5 text was encouraged. As a result, in
developing the chapter outline of text accompanying eachdiagnostic criteria set, it was determined that culture, as well as
age and gender, warranted separate discussion of variances
in symptom expression, risk, c ourse, prevalence, and other
aspects of diagnosis, where evidence was available. Although
not included for every disorder, a substantial proportion of dis-
orders include text that references such ﬁndings. This is a nota-ble improvement from the DSM-IV, which more explicitly rec-
ognizes cultural context than the DSM-III (4), but relegates
culture, gender, and age to sporadic discussion and collectively,rather than as separate topics. Symptom expression among dif-
ferent cultures is also referenced in revisions of certain disorder
criteria. For instance, the B criterion for social anxiety disorder(Criterion A in the DSM-IV) has been expanded beyond just
fear of embarrassment or humiliation of oneself to now include
anxiety symptoms about offending others – a nod to the cul-tural syndrome taijin kyofusho and an acknowledgment of the
fact that this presentation might be observed more in individu-
als from non-Western cultures (p articularly Japan and Korea).
DSM-5 CLASSIFICATION
Despite the fact that the DSM is a US classiﬁcation system
for the diagnosis of mental disorders, in conjunction with theuse of ofﬁcial ICD statistical code numbers, international in-
terest in the manual has ﬂourished since the DSM-III waspublished in 1980. The DSM-5 is based on explicit disorder
criteria, which taken together constitute a “nomenclature” of
mental disorders, along with a n extensive explanatory text
that is fully referenced for the ﬁrst time in the electronic ver-
sion of this DSM. Although there is a more limited ICD-10
set of criteria for research, the current WHO proposal forICD-11 will be to provide more general clinical descriptions
and guidelines without the adoption of separate research cri-
teria. The intent of joint APA and WHO collaborative effortsto date has been to develop a common research base for the
revision of both DSM-5 and ICD-11, through the NIH sup-
ported conference meetings and a series of “harmonizationmeetings”. The developers of the DSM-5 sought to maintain
and, where possible, enhance the consistency of DSM and
ICD revisions for clinical guidance – a challenging task giventhat revisions to each were not en tirely concurrent (the publi-
cation of the ICD-11 is pro jected for 2015). However, a
DSM-ICD harmonization coordinating group was organizedearly in the development process, under the direction of Ste-
ven Hyman, chair of the WHO’s International Advisory
Group for the Revision of ICD-10 Mental and BehaviouralDisorders and a DSM-5 Task Force member. The group con-
vened by teleconference and at several in-person meetings to
facilitate the sharing of information on development proc-esses for each publication and reduce discrepancies between
the two. Of note, several of the chairs or members of the ICD
revision Working Groups were also DSM-5 Work Groupmembers.
At the outset, it was clear that one of the primary strat-
egies would be to develop a joint approach to organizingthe “metastructure” or organizational framework by which
disorders are grouped into similar clusters based on shared
pathophysiology, genetics, disease risk, and other ﬁndingsfrom neuroscience and clinical experience. The DSM-IV’s
descriptive and phenomenological approach to classiﬁca-
tion was outdated and, in the framework of research fromscience that had emerged over the previous two decades,
also inaccurate. Likewise, the organizational structure for
the ICD-10 was open to a major restructuring, with the ex-pectation that a new numbering system for ICD-11 codes
would be initiated to accommodate a major expansion in
the number of codes available for all medical disorders.
As a result, a DSM-5 initiative to develop a more valid
basis for the organization of a mental disorder classiﬁcation
was rapidly converted into a joint effort of the DSM-5 TaskForce and the ICD-10 revision (ICD-11 development) Ad-
visory Committee. Using an expanded set of “validity
criteria” from those originally proposed by Robins andGuze in 1970 (26), a series of analyses and papers were
developed that were published in an international psychiat-
ric journal (27-34). It was rapidly recognized that the appli-cation of such “validators” was much more meaningful for
larger groups or disorder spectra than for individual cate-
gorical diagnoses. This resulted in a new organizational
93
 20515545, 2013, 2, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/wps.20050 by Medical University Of South Carolina, Wiley Online Library on [12/11/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

structure for the DSM-5 and the ICD-11, that is reﬂected in
Table 1. The linear structure of this organization is intended
to better reﬂect the relative strength of relationships be-tween disorder groups, whereas the internal organization of
disorder groups is intended to reﬂect more of a child-adult
developmental perspective.
Much of the research from genetics and psychiatry over
the past 20 years points to an overlapping genetic liability
between psychotic and mood disorders, particularly bipolardisorder, that belie DSM-IV’s se paration of these as distinc-
tive (35). In the DSM-5 classiﬁcation, the chapter on schizo-
phrenia and other psychotic di sorders is sequenced with that
of bipolar and related disorders (which are now separated
from unipolar mood disorders), which is then followed by
the chapter on depressive disorders. This also is consistentwith recent ﬁndings from the largest genome-wide study of
mental disorders to date (36), w hich identiﬁed shared poly-
morphisms between select neurodevelopmental disorders(autism spectrum disorder, ASD a nd attention-deﬁcit/hyper-
activity disorder, ADHD), schiz ophrenia, bipolar disorder,
and major depressive disorder. Incidentally, these comprisethe ﬁrst four chapters of the DSM-5.
A similar pattern – grouping based more so on neuro-
science and less on symptom expression – also occurs withinthe diagnostic categories. As noted above, ASD and ADHD
are now grouped together in neurodevelopmental disorders,
with some of the former DSM-IV “disorders ﬁrst diagnosed ininfancy, childhood, or adolescence” distributed throughout
DSM-5. In the obsessive-compulsive and related disorderschapter are body dysmorphic disorder (previously classiﬁed in
DSM-IV’s “somatoform disorders”) and trichotillomania
(hair-pulling disorder), which belonged to DSM-IV’s chapteron “impulse-control disorders not elsewhere classiﬁed”. For
trichotillomania, similarities to obsessive-compulsive disorder
and to other body-focused, repetitive pathologies (e.g., excori-ation [skin-picking] disorder) in terms of symptom expression,
comorbidity, and familial patterns suggested a closer resem-
blance to the obsessive-compulsive and related disorders thanto its DSM-IV neighbors of pathological gambling, intermit-
tent explosive disorder, kleptomania, or pyromania (37).
Like the pediatric disorders, DSM-IV’s anxiety disorderstoo are distributed into separate chapters of fear circuitry-
based anxiety disorders (e.g., phobias); anxiety disorders
related to obsessions and compulsions (e.g., obsessive-com-pulsive disorder); those that arise from trauma or extreme
stress (e.g., post-traumatic stress disorder, PTSD); and those
characterized by dissociation (e.g., dissociative amnesia).
Furthermore, the DSM-5 organization also reﬂects a
broader clustering among groups of diagnostic categories,
with those that tend to have similar premorbid personalitytraits and/or co-occur being placed proximally to one
another, including neurodevelopmental disorders, schizo-
phrenia and other psychotic diso rders. As indicated in the se-
ries of “metastructure” papers, bipolar disorder occupies an
intermediary position betwee n the schizophrenia and other
psychotic disorders and the emot ional or internalizing disor-
ders – exhibiting high levels of disinhibition, psychoticism,
and negative affectivity (31). The internalizing disorders, with
high levels of negative affectivity, include depressive disor-ders, anxiety disorders, obsessive-com-pulsive and related
disorders, trauma and stressor- related disorders, and disso-
ciative disorders. Somatic diso rders also frequently co-occur
with the emotional or internalizing disorders, that include so-
matic symptom and related disorders, feeding and eating dis-
orders, sleep-wake disorders, a nd sexual dysfunctions. Exter-
nalizing disorders include disr uptive, impulse control, and
conduct disorders, and the sub stance-related and addictive
disorders (38).
INTEGRATION OF DIMENSIONS
Despite the statement in the DSM-IV that “there is no
assumption that each category of mental disorder is a com-pletely discrete entity with absolute boundaries dividing it
from other mental disorders” (2, p. xxxi), the use of strict cat-
egorical boundaries has given the impression of psychiatricd i s o r d e r sa su n i t a r y ,d i s c r e t e phenomena. Throughout gen-
eral medicine, conditions are frequently conceptualized on a
continuum from “normal” to pathological, without relyingon a singular threshold to distinguish the presence or absence
of disease, as in serum cholest e r o la n dg l y c a t e dh e m o g l o b i n .
In evolving toward a structure that more closely follows thisTable 1 DSM-5 diagnostic chapters
Neurodevelopmental disorders
Schizophrenia spectrum and other psychotic disordersBipolar and related disordersDepressive disordersAnxiety disordersObsessive-compulsive and related disordersTrauma- and stressor-related disordersDissociative disordersSomatic symptom and related disordersFeeding and eating disordersElimination disordersSleep-wake disordersSexual dysfunctionsGender dysphoriaDisruptive, impulse-control, and conduct disorders
Substance-related and addictive disorders
Neurocognitive disordersPersonality disordersParaphilic disordersOther mental disorders
94 World Psychiatry 12:2 - June 2013
 20515545, 2013, 2, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/wps.20050 by Medical University Of South Carolina, Wiley Online Library on [12/11/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

approach, the DSM-5 includes dimensional aspects of diag-
nosis along with categories. Although, ultimately, diagnosis isstill largely dependent on a “yes or no” decision, use of speci-
ﬁers, subtypes, severity rating s, and cross-cutting symptom
assessments help clinicians better capture gradients of a dis-order that might otherwise be hin dered by a strict categorical
approach.
For instance, the new “with a nxious distress” speciﬁer,
applied to depressive disorders and bipolar and related disor-
ders, includes symptoms that a re not a part of the criteria for
most mood disorders (e.g., difﬁculty concentrating because ofworry) but nonetheless may describe a particular variant of
mood disorder that causes impairment and/or distress and
warrants intervention. It also yields clinically useful informa-tion for treatment planning and tracking outcomes that
would likely be masked under a residual diagnosis of “not
otherwise speciﬁed” in the D SM-IV, and may bring greater
awareness to clinicians and researchers about the importance
o fa s s e s s i n ga n x i e t yi nt h ep r e s e n c eo fm o o ds y m p t o m s .T h e
DSM-5’s inclusion of severity speciﬁers contributes impor-
tant details about the present ation and may be particularly
informative for promoting more appropriate treatment, as
treatment for certain mild disorders should differ from treat-ment regimens for moderate-to -severe presentations (39).
Some DSM-IV disorders were combined to form spectra
disorders in the DSM-5. The most notable example is ASD,which includes symptoms that characterize previous DSM-
IV autism disorder, Asperger’s disorder, child disintegrative
disorder, and pervasive developmental disorder NOS. Thisproposed revision was developed because of the presence of
very poor reliability data, that failed to validate their contin-
ued separation (40). Although the DSM-5 describes all ofthese presentations under one ru bric, speciﬁers are provided
to account for ASD variations, including speciﬁers for the
presence or absence of intellectual impairment, structurallanguage impairment, co-occurring medical conditions, or
loss of established skills. A child previously diagnosed with
Asperger’s disorder under t he DSM-IV could therefore be
diagnosed under the DSM-5 wi th ASD, with the speciﬁers
“without intellectual impairment” and “without structural
language impairment”.
Finally, integration of dimensions in the DSM-5 is encour-
aged for further study and clinical experience. Such dimen-
sional assessment can be applied across disorders through
use of cross-cutting quantitati ve assessments. These patient/
informant- and clinician-com pleted measures prompt clini-
cians to assess symptom domains relevant to most, if not all,mental disorders, like mood, anxiety, sleep, and cognition,
with a second level of measures speciﬁed for more in-depth
assessment when a particular do main is endorsed. If criteria
for a diagnosis are fulﬁlled, a third level of dimensional
assessment can help establish severity. For example, the ﬁrst
level of cross-cutti ng assessment of a giv en patient indicates
the presence of depressed mood; the clinician then adminis-
ters the Patient-Reported Out comes Measurement Informa-
tion System (PROMIS) Emotional Distress – Depression –Short Form. The score suggests the possible presence of
major depressive disorder, and after a clinical interview thatassesses the presence of diagnos tic criteria, a depression diag-
nosis may be given. The Nine-Item Patient Health Question-
naire can then be administered to establish baseline severity,with repeated administ ration at regular intervals as clinically
indicated for monitoring cour se and treatment response.
While the ﬁrst level cross-cutting measure is provided in theprinted DSM-5, all three levels of dimensional measures are
provided in the electronic version of the manual for down-
loading and clinical use without additional charge.
REVISIONS TO DIAGNOSTIC CRITERIA
By and large, there were not sweeping changes in the diag-
nostic criteria for most disorders. An abbreviated description
of the major deviations from the DSM-IV can be found inthe Appendix of the manual itself, with a more detailed ver-
sion online (
www.psychiatry.org/dsm 5). What follows below
is a select summary of revisions.
Combining and splitting DSM-IV disorders
Some disorders were revised by combining criteria from
multiple disorders into a single diagnosis, as in instances
where there was a lack of data to support their continued
separation. The most publically discussed example of this isASD. As noted previously, the addition of behavioral speci-
ﬁers indicates variants of ASD that account for the DSM-IV
disorders it subsumed. Somatic symptom disorder largelytakes the place of somatization disorder, hypochondriasis,
pain disorder, and undifferentiated somatoform disorder,
although many individuals pre viously diagnosed with hypo-
chondriasis will now meet criteria for illness anxiety disorder
(new to DSM-5). Substance use disorder is a combination of
DSM-IV’s substance abuse and substance dependence, thelatter of which was deemed inappropriate due to the pejora-
tive nature of the term dependence used to describe normal
physiological responses of withdrawal from certain substan-ces and medications. Further, the addition of severity ratings
for substance use disorder enables a diagnosis of mild sub-
stance use disorder, that will be coded separately (with the
ICD code for substance abuse in DSM-IV) from moderate-
to-severe levels (coded with the ICD codes previously used
for substance dependence).
Alternately, in some instances, a DSM-IV disorder was
split into independent diso rders under the DSM-5. DSM-
IV’s reactive attachment diso rder included the subtypes
“emotionally withdrawn/inhibited” and “indiscriminately
social/disinhibited”. Despite a shared etiology (i.e., lack of a
consistent, emotionally supportive caregiving environment),the reactive attachment subtype (reactive attachment disor-
der) is a manifestation of incomplete, insecure social attach-
ments and is more similar to int ernalizing disorders, like
95
 20515545, 2013, 2, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/wps.20050 by Medical University Of South Carolina, Wiley Online Library on [12/11/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

major depressive disorder, whereas the social disinhibition
subtype (disinhibited social engagement disorder) is evidentin children without secure social attachments but is more
similar to externalizing disorders, including ADHD. The two
subtypes also demonstrate dispa rities in course and treatment
response; thus, each was elevated to a separate full disorder
in the DSM-5 (41). Similarly, the DSM-5 now lists the DSM-
IV subtypes of breathing-related sleep disorder as independ-ent disorders with separate criteria (i.e., obstructive sleep
apnea hypopnea syndrome, cent ral sleep apnea, and sleep-
related hypoventilation), which is more consistent with theInternational Classiﬁcation of Sleep Disorders, 2nd Edition.
Speciﬁers and subtypes
Speciﬁers and subtypes deline ate phenomenological var-
iants of a disorder indicative of speciﬁc subgroupings, which
impact, among other outcome s, on treatment planning and
treatment developments. The numbers of speciﬁers and sub-types in the DSM-5 has been expanded to account for efforts
to dimensionalize disorder s more so than in the DSM-IV.
Within the depressive disorders and bipolar and related dis-orders, a speciﬁer of “with mixed features” replaces the diag-
nosis of bipolar I, mixed episode in the DSM-IV, given that
subthreshold mixed states of major depressive and manic epi-sodes are much more common an d may have speciﬁc treat-
ment implications (42,43) but w ould be excluded from diag-
nosis by continuing DSM-IV’s requirement that full criteriaare met for both syndromes. The “with mixed features” speci-
ﬁer, therefore, now applies to unipolar as well as bipolar con-
ditions. A speciﬁer of “with limited prosocial emotions” isadded to conduct disorder for children displaying extreme
callousness and negative affectiv ity, different severity (e.g.,
more frequent and severe patterns of aggression), and poorertreatment response than children who do not qualify for the
speciﬁer (44). Speciﬁc treatm ent interventions have been
developed that are more successful with this subgroup.
DSM-5’s major neurocognitive disorder (NCD) is
roughly equivalent to DSM-IV’s dementia, although cri-
t e r i af o rd e m e n t i ah a v eb e e nr e v i s e dt oa l s of o r mas e p a -rate and new diagnosis of mild NCD, representing the
presence of neurocognitive disturbance that has not risen
to the level of severity to warrant signiﬁcant impairmentor disruption in functioning, akin to DSM-IV’s mild cog-
nitive impairment that was included in the Appendix. In
addition to the core criteria for major and mild NCD, tenetiological subtypes are now provided, with separate cri-
teria and text for each. Other than the explicit link to
speciﬁc known etiologies, most of these subtypes’ criteriaare largely similar to one another. However, there are im-
portant and often subtle differences between these disor-
ders, as greater informatio no np o s t - m o r t e ml a b o r a t o r y
correlations and clinical progression have become avail-
able over the past two decades. Many, but not all, of
these subtypes were described brieﬂy in the DSM-IV, butthe DSM-5 recognizes each separately and in greater
detail to give clinicians more guidance in determiningpossible etiology.
New disorders
A rigorous review process was established for assessing all
proposed revisions to the DSM-5, and those suggesting inclu-
sion of new disorders were among the most stringently
assessed. Based on a review of existing evidence from neuro-science, clinical need, and public health signiﬁcance, a handful
of new disorders are included, many of which were elevated
from DSM-IV’s chapter on “conditions for further study”.Hoarding disorder addresses the excessive collection of often
useless items, including garbage, which frequently results in
hazardous living conditions for patients and/or dependents.
Disruptive mood dysregulation disorder (DMDD) was pro-
posed in response to a decade-long debate about whether or
not chronic irritability in children is a hallmark symptom of pe-diatric bipolar disorder. With the prevalence of childhood
bipolar disorders growing at an alarming rate, the DSM-5
Childhood and Adolescent Disorders Work Group comparedevidence from natural history and treatment studies of classic
bipolar disorder versus bipolar disorder diagnosed using non-
episodic irritability as a criterion, and determined that separatedisorders based on episodic versus persistent irritability were
justiﬁed (45). Therefore, children with extreme behavioral dys-
control but non-episodic irritability no longer qualify for a diag-nosis of bipolar disorder in the DSM-5 and instead would be
considered for DMDD. Other notable new disorders (which
were elevated from DSM-IV’s appendix) include binge eatingdisorder, premenstrual dysphoric disorder, restless legs syn-
drome, and REM sleep behavior disorder.
Removal from DSM-IV
One of the most controversial proposals for the DSM-5
concerned the removal of the bereavement exclusion for
major depressive episodes. Under the DSM-IV, individualsexhibiting symptoms of major depressive disorder were
excluded from diagnosis if also bereaved within the past 2
months. The intention was to prevent individuals experienc-ing normal grief reactions to loss of a loved one from being
labeled as having a mental disorder. Unfortunately, this also
prevented bereaved individuals who were experiencing amajor depressive episode from being appropriately diagnosed
and treated. It also implied an arbitrary time course to
bereavement and failed to rec ognize that experiences of
major loss – including losses other than the death of a loved
one, like job loss – can lead to depressive symptoms that
needed to be distinguished from those associated with amajor depressive disorder. Although symptoms of grief or
other losses can mimic those of depression and do not neces-
sarily suggest a mental disorder, for the subset of individuals
96 World Psychiatry 12:2 - June 2013
 20515545, 2013, 2, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/wps.20050 by Medical University Of South Carolina, Wiley Online Library on [12/11/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

whose loss does lead to a depressive disorder (or for whom a
depressive disorder was already present), appropriate diagno-sis and treatment may facilitate recovery. As a result, the
bereavement exclusion was li fted and replaced with much
more descriptive guidance on the distinction between symp-toms characteristic of normal grief and those that are indica-
tive of a clinical disorder (46).
Changes in naming conventions
Revisions in commonly used ter minology required an eval-
uation of the most appropriate terms for describing some men-
tal disorders – an issue of particular concern for consumer-advocate organizations. The term “mental retardation” under-
went several draft changes before the name “intellectual dis-
ability (intellectual developm ental disorder)” was approved.
The joint naming convention reﬂects use of the term
“intellectual disability” in US law (47), in professional jour-
nals, and by some advocacy organizations, while the paren-thetical term maintains language proposed for ICD-11 (48).
As described previously, the te rms “substance abuse and sub-
stance dependence” have been removed and are nowr e p l a c e dj o i n t l yb y“ s u b s t a n c eu s ed i s o r d e r ” .T h en a m eo ft h e
substance chapter itself (“substance-related and addictive dis-
orders”) was altered to include the term “addictive”, matchinga proposed ICD-11 naming conve ntion, which refers to inclu-
sion of gambling disorder as a behavioral syndrome with
symptoms and pathophysiology (e.g., reward system activa-
tion) largely mirroring those in substance-related disorders.
Also in keeping with ICD language, the “not otherwise spec-
iﬁed” categories in the DSM-IV have been renamed and re-conceptualized as “other speciﬁed” and “unspeciﬁed” catego-
ries in the DSM-5.
CONCLUSIONS
Final determination of DSM-5’s impact must await judg-
m e n tu n t i la f t e rt h em a n u a lh a sb e e ni nu s ef o rs o m et i m e .
Epidemiological studies will aid in detecting changes in prev-alence and comorbidities from the DSM-IV, including imple-
mentation of cross-national s urveys of disorders with high
public health relevance worldw ide, such as schizophrenia,
major depressive disorder, and substance use disorders. The
more immediate next steps for the DSM-5 include the devel-
opment of materials that may assist in its use in primary caresettings, adaptation of assessment instruments to DSM-5,
and documenting the evidence base for revision decisions in
the DSM-5 electronic archives. There will also be further test-ing and development of the dime nsional assessments in the
manual, including that of a ped iatric version of the interna-
tionally used WHO Disability Assessment Schedule 2.0.
By continuing collaboration with the WHO in future edi-
tions of the DSM, we can assure a more comparable interna-
tional statistical classiﬁcati on of mental disorders and movecloser to a truly uniﬁed nosology and approach to diagnosis.
Such a collaborative effort sh ould assist the 200,000 psychia-
trists worldwide to better care f or individuals with these life-
altering and potentially destru ctive conditions, and advance
a more synergistic and cumulative international researchagenda to ﬁnd the causes and cures for these disorders.
Acknowledgement
This paper is published thanks to an agreement with theAmerican Psychiatric Association, which reserves thecopyright. Copyright
VC2013, American Psychiatric Asso-
ciation. All rights reserved.
References
1. American Psychiatric Association. Diagnostic and statistical man-
ual of mental disorders, 5th ed. Arlington: American Psychiatric
Association, 2013.
2. American Psychiatric Association. Diagnostic and statistical man-
ual of mental disorders, 4th ed. Washington: American Psychiat-
ric Association, 1994.
3. Jablensky A, Sartorius N, Hirschfeld R et al. Diagnosis and classi-
ﬁcation of mental disorders and alcohol- and drug-related prob-
lems: a research agenda for the 1980s. Psychol Med 1983;13:907-21.
4. American Psychiatric Association. Diagnostic and statistical man-
ual of mental disorders, 3rd ed. Washington: American Psychiat-
ric Association, 1980.
5. Sartorius N (Principal Investigator). The WHO/Alcohol, Drug
Abuse, and Mental Health Administration Joint Project on Diag-
nosis and Classiﬁcation. Cooperative agreement U01MH035883,
from the National Institute of Mental Health to the World Health
Organization, 1983-2001.
6. World Health Organization. Manual of the international statisti-
cal classiﬁcation of diseases, injuries, and causes of death. Tenth
revision of the international classiﬁcation of diseases. Geneva:
World Health Organization, 1992.
7. World Health Organization. ICD-10 Classiﬁcation of mental and
behavioural disorders. Diagnostic criteria for research. Geneva:
World Health Organization, 1993.
8. World Health Organization. ICD-10 Classiﬁcation of mental and
behavioural disorders. Clinical descriptions and diagnostic guide-lines. Geneva: World Health Organization, 1993.
9. First MB, Pincus HA. Classiﬁcation in psychiatry: ICD-10 vs.
DSM-IV. A response. Br J Psychiatry 1999;175:205-9.
10. Andrews G, Slade T, Peters L. Classiﬁcation in psychiatry: ICD-
10 versus DSM-IV. Br J Psychiatry 1999;174:3-5.
11. Regier DA, Narrow WE, Kuhl EA et al (eds). Evolution of the
DSM-V conceptual framework: development, dimensions, dis-
ability, spectra, and gender/culture. Arlington: American Psychi-
atric Association, 2010.
12. Clarke DE, Narrow WE, Regier DA et al. DSM-5 ﬁeld trials in the
United States and Canada, Part I: study design, sampling strategy,
implementation, and analytic approaches. Am J Psychiatry 2013;
170:43-58.
13. Regier DA, Narrow WE, Clarke DE et al. DSM-5 ﬁeld trials in the
United States and Canada, Part II: test-retest reliability of selectedcategorical diagnoses. Am J Psychiatry 2013;170:59-70.
14. Narrow WE, Clarke DE, Kuramoto SJ et al. DSM-5 ﬁeld trials
in the United States and Canada, Part III: development and
97
 20515545, 2013, 2, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/wps.20050 by Medical University Of South Carolina, Wiley Online Library on [12/11/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

reliability testing of a cross-cutting symptom assessment for
DSM-5. Am J Psychiatry 2013;170:71-82.
15. Regier D (Principal Investigator). Developing the Research Base
for DSM-V and ICD-11. Cooperative agreement U13MH067855
from the National Institute of Mental Health, National Institute
on Drug Abuse, and National Institute on Alcohol Abuse and Al-coholism to American Psychiatric Institute for Research and Edu-
cation, 2003-2008.
16. Saxena S, Esparza P, Regier DA et al (eds). Public health aspects of
diagnosis and classiﬁcation of men tal and behavioral disorders. Reﬁn-
ing the research agenda for DSM-5 and ICD-11. Arlington: American
Psychiatric Association and World Health Organization, 2012.
17. Goldberg D, Kendler KS, Sirovatka PJ et al (eds). Diagnostic
issues in depression and generalized anxiety disorder: reﬁning theresearch agenda for DSM-V. Arlington: American Psychiatric
Association, 2010.
18. Tamminga CA, Sirovatka PJ, Regier DA et al (eds). Deconstruct-
ing psychosis: reﬁning the research agenda for DSM-V. Arlington:
American Psychiatric Association, 2009.
19. Dimsdale JE, Xin Y, Kleinman A et al (eds). Somatic presentations
of mental disorders: reﬁning the research agenda for DSM-V.
Arlington: American Psychiatric Association, 2009.
20. Widiger TA, Simonsen E, Sirovatka PJ et al (eds). Dimensional
models of personality disorders: reﬁning the research agenda forDSM-V. Arlington: American Psychiatric Association, 2006.
21. Saunders JB, Schuckit MA, Sirovatka PJ et al (eds). Diagnostic
issues in substance use disorders: reﬁning the research agenda forDSM-V. Arlington: American Psychiatric Association, 2007.
22. Sunderland T, Jeste DV, Baiyewu O et al (eds). Diagnostic issues
in dementia: advancing the research agenda for DSM-V. Arling-
ton: American Psychiatric Association, 2007.
23. Helzer JE, Kraemer HC, Krueger RF et al (eds). Dimensional
approaches in diagnostic classiﬁcation: reﬁning the research
agenda for DSM-V. Washington: American Psychiatric Associa-
tion, 2008.
24. Andrews G, Charney DS, Sirovatka PJ et al (eds). Stress-induced
and fear circuitry disorders: reﬁning the research agenda forDSM-V. Arlington: American Psychiatric Association, 2009.
25. Hollander E, Zohar J, Sirovatka PJ et al (eds). Obsessive-compul-
sive behavior spectrum disorders: reﬁning the research agenda
for DSM-V. Arlington: American Psychiatric Association, 2010.
26. Robins E, Guze SB. Establishment of diagnostic validity in psy-
chiatric illness: its application to schizophrenia. Am J Psychiatry
1970;126:983-7.
27. Andrews G, Goldberg DP, Krueger RF et al. Exploring the feasi-
bility of a meta-structure for DSM-V and ICD-11: could it
improve utility and validity? Psychol Med 2009;39:1993-2000.
28. Sachdev P, Andrews G, Hobbs MJ et al. Neurocognitive disor-
ders: cluster 1 of the proposed meta-structure for DSM-V and
ICD-11. Psychol Med 2009;39:2001-12.
29. Andrews G, Pine DS, Hobbs MJ et al. Neurodevelopmental disor-
ders: cluster 2 of the proposed meta-structure for DSM-V and
ICD-11. Psychol Med 2009;39:2013-23.
30. Carpenter WT Jr, Bustillo JR, Thaker GK et al. Psychoses: cluster
3 of the proposed meta-structure for DSM-V and ICD-11. Psy-chol Med 2009;39:2025-42.31. Goldberg DP, Krueger RF, Andrews G et al. Emotional disorders:
cluster 4 of the proposed meta-structure for DSM-V and ICD-11.
Psychol Med 2009;39:2043-59.
32. Krueger RF, South SC. Externalizing disorders: cluster 5 of the
proposed meta-structure for DSM-V and ICD-11. Psychol Med
2009;39:2061-70.
33. Goldberg DP, Andrews G, Hobbs MJ. Where should bipolar ap-
pear in the meta-structure? Psychol Med 2009;39:2071-81.
34. Wittchen H-U, Beesdo K, Gloster AT. A new meta-structure of
mental disorders: a helpful step into the future or a harmful step
back into the past? Psychol Med 2009;39:2083-9.
35. Owen MJ, Craddock N, Jablensky A. The genetic deconstruction
of psychosis. Schizophr Bull 2007;33:905-11.
36. Cross-Disorder Group of the Psychiatric Genomics Consortium.
Identiﬁcation of risk loci with shared effects on ﬁve major psychi-
atric disorders: a genome-wide analysis. Lancet (in press).
37. Stein DJ, Grant JE, Franklin ME et al. Trichotillomania (hair pull-
ing disorder), skin picking disorder, and stereotypic movement
disorder: toward DSM-V. Depress Anxiety 2010;27:611-26.
38. Krueger RF. The structure of common mental disorders. Arch
Gen Psychiatry 1999;56:921-6.
39. Baumeister H. Inappropriate prescriptions of antidepressant dr-
ugs in patients with subthreshold to mild depression: time for the
evidence to become practice. J Affect Disord 2012;139:240-3.
40. Lord C, Petkova E, Hus V et al. A multisite study of the clinical
diagnosis of different autism spectrum disorders. Arch Gen Psy-
chiatry 2012;69:306-13.
41. Zeanah CH, Gleason MM. Reactive attachment disorder: a
review for DSM-V. Report presented to the American Psychiatric
Association, 2010; available online at
www.dsm5.org.
42. Agosti V, Stewart JW. Hypomania with and without dysphoria:
comparison of comorbidity and clinical characteristics of respo-ndents from a national community sample. J Affect Disord
2008;108:177-82.
43. Suppes T, Mintz J, McElroy SL et al. Mixed hypomania in 908
patients with bipolar disorder evaluated prospectively in the Stan-
ley Foundation Bipolar Treatment Network: a sex-speciﬁc phe-nomenon. Arch Gen Psychiatry 2005;62:1089-96.
44. Frick PJ, Mofﬁtt TE. A proposal to the DSM-V Childhood Disor-
ders and the ADHD and Disruptive Behavior Disorders Work
Groups to include a speciﬁer to the diagnosis of conduct disorder
based on the presence of callous-unemotional traits. Report pre-sented to the American Psychiatric Association, 2010; available
online at
www.dsm5.org.
45. Leibenluft MD. Severe mood dysregulation, irritability, and the
diagnostic boundaries of bipolar disorder in youths. Am J Psychi-
atry 2011;168:129-42.
46. Zisook S, Corruble E, Duan N et al. The bereavement exclusion
and DSM-5. Depress Anxiety 2012;29:425-43.
47. Rosa’s Law. Public Law No. 111-256, 2010.48. Salvador-Carulla L, Reed GN, Vaez-Azizi LM et al. Intellectual
developmental disorders: towards a new name, deﬁnition and
framework for “mental retardation/intellectual disability” in
ICD-11. World Psychiatry 2011;10:175-80.
DOI 10.1002/wps.20050
98 World Psychiatry 12:2 - June 2013
 20515545, 2013, 2, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/wps.20050 by Medical University Of South Carolina, Wiley Online Library on [12/11/2025]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License

