November 13, 2018 Circulation. 2018;138:e618–e651. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000617 e618Key Words: AHA Scientific Statements 
◼ myocardial infarction ◼ Type 1 MI ◼ 
Type 2 MI ◼ Type 3 MI ◼ Type 4a MI ◼ 
Type 4b MI ◼ Type 4c MI ◼ Type 5 MI 
◼ cardiac troponin ◼ high sensitivity 
cardiac troponin ◼ myocardial injury 
◼ prior myocardial infarction ◼ silent 
myocardial infarction ◼ recurrent myocardial infarction ◼ reinfarction  
◼ cardiac procedural myocardial injury 
◼ Takotsubo syndrome ◼ myocardial 
infarction with nonobstructive coronary 
arteries (MINOCA)
© 2018 The European Society of 
Cardiology, American College of 
Cardiology Foundation, American Heart 
Association, Inc., and the World Heart Federation.ESC/ACC/AHA/WHF EXPERT CONSENSUS DOCUMENT
Fourth Universal Definition of Myocardial 
Infarction (2018)Circulation
Kristian Thygesen 
Joseph S. Alpert 
Allan S. Jaffe Bernard R. Chaitman Jeroen J. Bax David A. Morrow Harvey D. White The Executive Group on behalf of the Joint European Society of Cardiology 
(ESC)/American College of Cardiology (ACC)/American Heart Association (AHA)/World Heart Federation (WHF) Task Force for the Universal Defini
-
tion of Myocardial Infarction
Authors/Task Force Members/Chairpersons: Kristian Thygesen* (Denmark), Joseph S. Alpert* (USA), Allan S. Jaffe (USA), Bernard R. Chaitman (USA), Jeroen J. Bax (The Netherlands), David A. Morrow (USA), Harvey D. White* (New Zealand), Hans Mickley (Denmark), Filippo Crea (Italy), Frans Van de Werf (Belgium), Chiara Bucciarelli-Ducci (UK), Hugo A. Katus (Germany), Fausto J. Pinto (Portugal), Elliott M. Antman (USA), Christian W. Hamm (Ger
-
many), Raffaele De Caterina (Italy), James L. Januzzi Jr (USA), Fred S. Apple (USA), Maria Angeles Alonso Garcia (Spain), S. Richard Underwood (UK), John M. Canty Jr (USA), Alexander R. Lyon (UK), P .J. Devereaux (Canada), Jose Luis Zamorano (Spain), Bertil Lindahl (Sweden), William S. Weintraub (USA), L. Kristin Newby (USA), Renu Virmani (USA), Pascal Vranckx (Bel
-
gium), Don Cutlip (USA), Raymond J. Gibbons (USA), Sidney C. Smith (USA), Dan Atar (Norway), Russell V. Luepker (USA), Rose Marie Robertson (USA), Robert O. Bonow (USA), P . Gabriel Steg (France), Patrick T. O’Gara (USA), Keith A.A. Fox (UK)
https://www.ahajournals.org/journal/circ*Corresponding authors. Kristian Thygesen, Department of Cardiology, Aarhus University Hospital, Palle Juul-Jensens 
Boulevard, DK-8200 Aarhus N, Denmark. Tel: +45 78452262, Fax: +45 78452260, Email: kthygesen@oncable.dk;  kristhyg@rm.dk. Joseph S. Alpert, Department of Medicine, University of Arizona College of Medicine, 1501 
N. Campbell Ave., P .O. Box 245037, Tucson AZ 85724-5037, USA. Tel: +1 5206262763, Email: jalpert@email.
arizona.edu. Harvey D. White, Green Lane Cardiovascular Service, Auckland City Hospital, Private Bag 92024, 1030 
Auckland, New Zealand. Tel: +64 96309992, Fax: 00 64 9 6309915, Email: harveyw@adhb.govt.nz.
The American Heart Association requests that this document be cited as follows: Thygesen K, Alpert JS, Jaffe 
AS, Chaitman BR, Bax JJ, Morrow DA, White HD: the Executive Group on behalf of the Joint European Society of 
Cardiology (ESC)/American College of Cardiology (ACC)/American Heart Association (AHA)/World Heart Federation (WHF) Task Force for the Universal Definition of Myocardial Infarction. Fourth universal definition of myocardial 
infarction (2018). Circulation. 2018;138:e618–e651. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000617.The disclosure forms of all experts 
involved in the development of this 
Expert Consensus Document are 
available on the ESC website  
www.escardio.org/guidelines.Document Reviewers, see page 
e645
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on November 12, 2025

Thygesen et al 2018 ESC/ACC/AHA/WHF Fourth Universal Definition of MI
Circulation. 2018;138:e618–e651. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000617 November 13, 2018
 e619
CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINESTABLE OF CONTENTS
Abbreviations and Acronyms  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . e619
 1.  What Is New in the Universal Definition  
of Myocardial Infarction? . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . e620
 2.  Universal Definitions of Myocardial Injury  
and Myocardial Infarction: Summary  . . . . . . . . . . . e621
 3. Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . e621
 4.  Pathological Characteristics of  
Myocardial Ischemia and Infarction  . . . . . . . . . . . . e622
 5.  Biomarker Detection of Myocardial  
Injury and Infarction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . e623
 6.  Clinical Presentations of Myocardial Infarction  . . . . e623
 7. Clinical Classification of Myocardial Infarction  . . . . e624
 7.1. Myocardial Infarction Type 1 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . e624
 7.2. Myocardial Infarction Type 2 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . e625
 7.3.  Myocardial Infarction Type 2 and  
Myocardial Injury  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . e626
 7.4. Myocardial Infarction Type 3 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . e626
 8. Coronary Procedure–Related Myocardial Injury . . . . e628
 9.  Myocardial Infarction Associated With  Percutaneous Coronary Intervention  (Type 4a Myocardial Infarction) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . e629
10.  Stent/Scaffold Thrombosis Associated With  
Percutaneous Coronary Intervention  
(Type 4b Myocardial Infarction) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . e629
11.  Restenosis Associated With Percutaneous  Coronary Intervention (Type 4c Myocardial  
Infarction)  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . e630
12.  Myocardial Infarction Associated With Coronary  
Artery Bypass Grafting (Type 5 Myocardial  Infarction)  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . e630
13.  Other Definitions of Myocardial Infarction Related  to Percutaneous Coronary Intervention or  
Coronary Artery Bypass Grafting  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . e631
14.  Recurrent Myocardial Infarction  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . e631
15.  Reinfarction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . e631
16.  Myocardial Injury and Infarction Associated  With Cardiac Procedures Other Than  
Revascularization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . e631
17.  Myocardial Injury and Infarction Associated  With Noncardiac Procedures  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . e631
18.  Myocardial Injury or Infarction Associated  With Heart Failure  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . e632
19.  Takotsubo Syndrome  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . e632
20.  Myocardial Infarction With Nonobstructive  
Coronary Arteries . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . e633
21.  Myocardial Injury and/or Infarction Associated  With Kidney Disease  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . e633
22.  Myocardial Injury and/or Infarction in Critically  
Ill Patients  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . e634
23.  Biochemical Approach for Diagnosing Myocardial  Injury and Infarction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . e634
24.  Analytical Issues of Cardiac Troponins  . . . . . . . . . . e635
25.  The 99th Percentile Upper Reference Limit . . . . . . . e636
26.  Operationalizing Criteria for Myocardial Injury  
and Infarction  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . e636
27.  Electrocardiographic Detection of Myocardial  
Infarction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . e637
28.  Application of Supplemental  Electrocardiogram Leads  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . e638Abbreviations and Acronyms
ACC American College of Cardiology
ACS Acute coronary syndrome
AHA American Heart Association
ARC-2 Academic Research Consortium-2
AUC Area under the curve
CAD Coronary artery disease
CABG Coronary artery bypass grafting
CKD Chronic kidney disease
CK-MB Creatine kinase MB isoform
CMR Cardiac magnetic resonance
CTCA  Computed tomographic coronary angiography
cTn Cardiac troponin
cTnI Cardiac troponin I
cTnT Cardiac troponin T
CT Computed tomography
CV Coefficient of variation
EF Ejection fraction
ECG  Electrocardiogram or electrocardiographic
HF Heart failure
hs-cTn High-sensitivity cardiac troponin
IFCC  International Federation of Clinical Chemistry and Laboratory 
Medicine
ISFC  International Society and Federation of Cardiology
LAD Left anterior descending artery
LBBB Left bundle branch block
LoD Limit of detection
LGE Late gadolinium enhancement
LGE-CMR  Late gadolinium enhancement cardiac magnetic resonance
LV Left ventricular
LVH Left ventricular hypertrophy
MI Myocardial infarction
MINOCA  Myocardial infarction with nonobstructive coronary arteries
MONICA  MONItoring of trends and determinants in CArdiovascular disease
MPS Myocardial perfusion scintigraphy
NHLBI  National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute
NSTEMI  Non–ST-elevation myocardial infarction
PET Positron emission tomography
PCI Percutaneous coronary intervention
POC Point of care
RBBB Right bundle branch block
SPECT  Single photon emission computed tomography
STEMI ST-elevation myocardial infarction
ST-T ST-segment–T wave
TIMI Thrombolysis in Myocardial Infarction
TTS Takotsubo syndrome
UDMI  Universal Definition of Myocardial Infarction
URL Upper reference limit
WHF World Heart Federation
WHO World Health Organization
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on November 12, 2025

Thygesen et al 2018 ESC/ACC/AHA/WHF Fourth Universal Definition of MI
November 13, 2018 Circulation. 2018;138:e618–e651. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000617
 e620
CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINES1. WHAT IS NEW IN THE UNIVERSAL DEFINITION OF MYOCARDIAL INFARCTION?
What’s new in the universal definition of myocardial infarction?
New concepts
•  Differentiation of myocardial infarction from myocardial injury.
•  Highlighting periprocedural myocardial injury after cardiac and noncardiac procedures as discrete from myocardial infarction.
•  Consideration of electrical remodeling (cardiac memory) in assessing repolarization abnormalities with tachyarrhythmia, pacing, and rate-related conduction 
disturbances.
•  Use of cardiovascular magnetic resonance to define etiology of myocardial injury.
•  Use of computed tomographic coronary angiography in suspected myocardial infarction.
Updated concepts
•  Type 1 myocardial infarction: Emphasis on the causal relationship of plaque disruption with coronary atherothrombosis; new Figure 3.
•  Type 2 myocardial infarction: Settings with oxygen demand and supply imbalance unrelated to acute coronary atherothrombosis; new Figures 4 and 5.
•  Type 2 myocardial infarction: Relevance of presence or absence of coronary artery disease to prognosis and therapy.
•  Differentiation of myocardial injury from type 2 myocardial infarction; new Figure 6.
•  Type 3 myocardial infarction: Clarify why type 3 myocardial infarction is a useful category to differentiate from sudden cardiac death.
•  Types 4–5 myocardial infarction: Emphasis on distinction between procedure-related myocardial injury and procedure-related myocardial infarction.
•  Cardiac troponin: Analytical issues for cardiac troponins; new Figure 7.
•  Emphasis on the benefits of high-sensitivity cardiac troponin assays.
•  Considerations relevant to the use of rapid rule-out and rule-in protocols for myocardial injury and myocardial infarction.
•  Issues related to specific diagnostic change (“delta”) criteria for the use of cardiac troponins to detect or exclude acute myocardial injury.
•  Consideration of new non–rate-related right bundle branch block with specific repolarization patterns.
•  ST-segment elevation in lead aVR with specific repolarization patterns, as a STEMI equivalent.
•  ECG detection of myocardial ischemia in patients with an implantable cardiac defibrillator or a pacemaker.
•  Enhanced role of imaging including cardiac magnetic resonance imaging for the diagnosis of myocardial infarction; new Figure 8.
New sections•  Takotsubo syndrome.
•  MINOCA.
•  Chronic kidney disease.
•  Atrial fibrillation.•  Regulatory perspective on myocardial infarction.
•  Silent or unrecognized myocardial infarction.
ECG indicates electrocardiogram; MINOCA, myocardial infarction with nonobstructive coronary arteries; STEMI, ST-elevation myocardial infarction.29.  Electrocardiographic Detection of Myocardial Injury . . .e639
30.  Prior or Silent/Unrecognized Myocardial Infarction  . . e639
31.  Conditions That Confound the Electrocardiographic  
Diagnosis of Myocardial Infarction  . . . . . . . . . . . . . e639
32.  Conduction Disturbances and Pacemakers . . . . . . . e640
33.  Atrial Fibrillation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . e640
34.  Imaging Techniques . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . e640
 34.1.  Echocardiography . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . e640
 34.2.  Radionuclide Imaging . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . e641
 34.3.  Cardiac Magnetic Resonance Imaging . . . . . . e641
 34.4.  Computed Tomographic Coronary Angiography e641
35.  Applying Imaging in Acute Myocardial Infarction  . . e641
36.  Applying Imaging in Late Presentation  
of Myocardial Infarction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . e64237.  Regulatory Perspective on Myocardial Infarction  in Clinical Trials  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . e643
38.  Silent/Unrecognized Myocardial Infarction  
in Epidemiological Studies and Quality  
Programs  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . e643
39.  Individual and Public Implications of the Myocardial Infarction Definition . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . e643
40.  Global Perspectives of the Definition of Myocardial Infarction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . e644
41.  Using the Universal Definition of Myocardial  Infarction in the Healthcare System  . . . . . . . . . . . . e644
Appendix . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . e645
Acknowledgment  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . e645
References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . e645
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on November 12, 2025

Thygesen et al 2018 ESC/ACC/AHA/WHF Fourth Universal Definition of MI
Circulation. 2018;138:e618–e651. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000617 November 13, 2018 e621
CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINES2. UNIVERSAL DEFINITIONS OF MYOCARDIAL INJURY AND MYOCARDIAL 
INFARCTION: SUMMARY
Universal definitions of myocardial injury and myocardial infarction
Criteria for myocardial injury
The term myocardial injury should be used when there is evidence of elevated cardiac troponin values (cTn) with at least 1 value above the 99th percentile 
upper reference limit (URL). The myocardial injury is considered acute if there is a rise and/or fall of cTn values.
Criteria for acute myocardial infarction (types 1, 2 and 3 MI)
The term acute myocardial infarction should be used when there is acute myocardial injury with clinical evidence of acute myocardial ischemia and with 
detection of a rise and/or fall of cTn values with at least 1 value above the 99th percentile URL and at least 1 of the following:
 •  Symptoms of myocardial ischemia;
 •  New ischemic ECG changes;
 •  Development of pathological Q waves;
 •  Imaging evidence of new loss of viable myocardium or new regional wall motion abnormality in a pattern consistent with an ischemic etiology;
 •  Identification of a coronary thrombus by angiography or autopsy (not for types 2 or 3 MIs).
Postmortem demonstration of acute atherothrombosis in the artery supplying the infarcted myocardium meets criteria for type 1 MI. Evidence of an imbalance 
between myocardial oxygen supply and demand unrelated to acute atherothrombosis meets criteria for type 2 MI. Cardiac death in patients with symptoms 
suggestive of myocardial ischemia and presumed new ischemic ECG changes before cTn values become available or abnormal meets criteria for type 3 MI.
Criteria for coronary procedure–related myocardial infarction (types 4 and 5 MI)
Percutaneous coronary intervention (PCI)–related MI is termed type 4a MI.
Coronary artery bypass grafting (CABG)–related MI is termed type 5 MI.
Coronary procedure–related MI ≤48 hours after the index procedure is arbitrarily defined by an elevation of cTn values >5 times for type 4a MI and >10 times 
for type 5 MI of the 99th percentile URL in patients with normal baseline values. Patients with elevated preprocedural cTn values, in whom the preprocedural 
cTn level are stable (≤20% variation) or falling, must meet the criteria for a >5 or >10 fold increase and manifest a change from the baseline value of >20%. In 
addition with at least 1 of the following:
 •  New ischemic ECG changes (this criterion is related to type 4a MI only);
 •  Development of new pathological Q waves;
 •  Imaging evidence of loss of viable myocardium that is presumed to be new and in a pattern consistent with an ischemic etiology;
 •  Angiographic findings consistent with a procedural flow-limiting complication such as coronary dissection, occlusion of a major epicardial artery or graft, 
side-branch occlusion-thrombus, disruption of collateral flow or distal embolization.
Isolated development of new pathological Q waves meets the type 4a MI or type 5 MI criteria with either revascularization procedure if cTn values are elevated 
and rising but less than the prespecified thresholds for PCI and CABG.
Other types of 4 MI include type 4b MI stent thrombosis and type 4c MI restenosis that both meet type 1 MI criteria.
Postmortem demonstration of a procedure-related thrombus meets the type 4a MI criteria or type 4b MI criteria if associated with a stent.
Criteria for prior or silent/unrecognized myocardial infarctionAny 1 of the following criteria meets the diagnosis for prior or silent/unrecognized MI:
 •  Abnormal Q waves with or without symptoms in the absence of nonischemic causes.
 •  Imaging evidence of loss of viable myocardium in a pattern consistent with ischemic etiology.
 •  Patho-anatomical findings of a prior MI.
CABG indicates coronary artery bypass grafting; cTn, cardiac troponin; ECG, electrocardiogram; MI, myocardial infarction; PCI, percutaneous coronary 
intervention; URL, upper reference limit.
3. INTRODUCTION
In the late 19th century, postmortem examinations 
demonstrated a possible relationship between throm-botic occlusion of a coronary artery and myocardial 
infarction (MI).
1 However, it was not until the begin-
ning of the 20th century that the first clinical descrip-
tions appeared describing a connection between the 
formation of a thrombus in a coronary artery and its 
associated clinical features.2,3 Despite these landmark 
observations, considerable time elapsed before general clinical acceptance of this entity was achieved, in part 
due to 1 autopsy study that showed no thrombi in the 
coronary arteries of 31% of deceased patients with an MI.
4 The clinical entity was referred to as coronary 
thrombosis, although use of the term “MI” ultimately prevailed. Over the years, several different definitions 
of MI have been used, leading to controversy and con-fusion. Hence, a general and worldwide definition for MI was needed. This occurred for the first time in the 
1950–1970s, when working groups from the World 
Health Organization (WHO) established a primarily elec-trocardiographic (ECG)–based definition of MI intended 
for epidemiological use.
5 The original description, with 
minor modifications, is still used in epidemiological sur -
veys (Figure 1).6–8
With the introduction of more sensitive cardiac bio-
markers, the European Society of Cardiology (ESC) and 
the American College of Cardiology (ACC) collaborat-
ed to redefine MI using a biochemical and clinical ap-
proach, and reported that myocardial injury detected by abnormal biomarkers in the setting of acute myocardial 
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on November 12, 2025

November 13, 2018 Circulation. 2018;138:e618–e651. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000617 e622
CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINESThygesen et al 2018 ESC/ACC/AHA/WHF Fourth Universal Definition of MI
ischemia should be labeled as MI.9 The principle was fur -
ther refined by the Global MI Task Force, leading to the 
Universal Definition of Myocardial Infarction Consensus 
Document in 2007, introducing a novel MI classifica-tion system with 5 subcategories.
10 This document, en-
dorsed by the ESC, the ACC, the American Heart Asso-
ciation (AHA), and the World Heart Federation (WHF), 
was adopted by the WHO.11 The development of even 
more sensitive assays for markers of myocardial injury 
made further revision of the document necessary, par -
ticularly for patients who undergo coronary procedures 
or cardiac surgery. As a result, the Joint ESC/ACC/AHA/
WHF Task Force produced the Third Universal Defini-
tion of Myocardial Infarction Consensus Document in 2012.
12
Studies have shown that myocardial injury, defined 
by an elevated cardiac troponin (cTn) value, is frequent-ly encountered clinically and is associated with an ad-verse prognosis.
13,14 Although myocardial injury is a pre-
requisite for the diagnosis of MI, it is also an entity in 
itself. To establish a diagnosis of MI, criteria in addition 
to abnormal biomarkers are required. Nonischemic myocardial injury may arise secondary to many cardiac 
conditions such as myocarditis, or may be associated 
with noncardiac conditions such as renal failure.
15 
Therefore, for patients with increased cTn values, clini-cians must distinguish whether patients have suffered a nonischemic myocardial injury or one of the MI sub-
types. If there is no evidence to support the presence of 
myocardial ischemia, a diagnosis of myocardial injury should be made. This diagnosis can be changed if sub-sequent evaluation indicates criteria for MI. The current 
Fourth Universal Definition of Myocardial Infarction Consensus Document reflects these considerations through adhering to the clinical approach of the defini-
tion of MI.
4. PATHOLOGICAL CHARACTERISTICS 
OF MYOCARDIAL ISCHEMIA AND 
INFARCTION
MI is defined pathologically as myocardial cell death 
due to prolonged ischemia. Diminished cellular glyco-gen, and relaxed myofibrils and sarcolemmal disrup-tion, are the first ultrastructural changes and are seen as early as 10–15 minutes after the onset of ischemia.
16 
Mitochondrial abnormalities are observed as early as 10 minutes after coronary occlusion by electron microsco-py and are progressive.
17 It can take hours before myo-
cyte necrosis can be identified by postmortem exami-nation in humans; this is in contrast to animal models, in which biochemical evidence of myocardial cell death due to apoptosis can be detected within 10 minutes of induced myocardial ischemia in association with myo-cyte death.
15 Experimentally, necrosis progresses from 
the subendocardium to the subepicardium over several hours. The time course may be prolonged by increased collateral flow, reduced determinants of myocardial ox-ygen consumption, and intermittent occlusion/reperfu-sion, which can precondition the heart.
18 Timely imple-Clinical Criteria for MI
The clinical definition of MI denotes the presence 
of acute myocardial injury detected by abnormal cardiac biomarkers in the setting of evidence of acute myocardial ischemia.
Figure 1. History of documents on the definition of myocardial infarction.  
ACC indicates American College of Cardiology; AHA, American Heart Association; ESC, European Society of Cardiology; ISFC, International Society and Federation 
of Cardiology; MONICA, MONItoring of trends and determinants in CArdiovascular disease; NHLBI, National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute; UDMI, Universal 
Definition of Myocardial Infarction; WHF, World Heart Federation; WHO, World Health Organization.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on November 12, 2025

Thygesen et al 2018 ESC/ACC/AHA/WHF Fourth Universal Definition of MI
Circulation. 2018;138:e618–e651. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000617 November 13, 2018
 e623
CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINESmentation of reperfusion therapy, when appropriate, 
reduces ischemic injury of the myocardium.19,20
5. BIOMARKER DETECTION OF 
MYOCARDIAL INJURY AND INFARCTION
Cardiac troponin I (cTnI) and T (cTnT) are components 
of the contractile apparatus of myocardial cells and are expressed almost exclusively in the heart.
21,22 Increases 
in cTnI values have not been reported to occur follow-ing injury to noncardiac tissues. The situation is more 
complex for cTnT. Biochemical data indicate that in-
jured skeletal muscle expresses proteins that are detect-ed by the cTnT assay, leading to some situations where elevations of cTnT could emanate from skeletal mus-
cle.
23–27 Recent data suggest that the frequency of such 
elevations in the absence of ischemic heart disease may be higher than originally thought.
28,29 cTnI and cTnT are 
the preferred biomarkers for the evaluation of myocar -
dial injury,12,21,22,30 and high-sensitivity (hs)–cTn assays 
are recommended for routine clinical use.22 Other bio-
markers, for example, wwm (CK-MB), are less sensitive and less specific.
31 Myocardial injury is defined as being 
present when blood levels of cTn are increased above the 99th percentile upper reference limit (URL).
12,21,22,30 
The injury may be acute, as evidenced by a newly de-tected dynamic rising and/or falling pattern of cTn val-
ues above the 99th percentile URL, or chronic, in the 
setting of persistently elevated cTn levels.
Although elevated cTn values reflect injury to myo-
cardial cells, they do not indicate the underlying patho-physiological mechanisms, and can arise following 
preload-induced mechanical stretch or physiological stresses in otherwise normal hearts.
32–34 Various causes 
have been suggested for the release of structural pro-
teins from the myocardium, including normal turnover 
of myocardial cells, apoptosis, cellular release of cTn degradation products, increased cellular wall permea-
bility, the formation and release of membranous blebs, 
and myocyte necrosis.
27,35 Yet, it is not clinically pos-
sible to distinguish which increases of cTn levels are 
due to which mechanisms.36 However, regardless of 
the mechanism, acute myocardial injury, when associ-ated with a rising and/or falling pattern of cTn values 
with at least 1 value above the 99th percentile URL and caused by myocardial ischemia, is designated as an 
acute MI.12,21,22,30 Histological evidence of myocardial 
injury with myocyte death can be detected in clinical conditions associated with nonischemic mechanisms of 
myocardial injury as well
37,38 (Figure 2).
Myocardial ischemic or nonischemic conditions as-
sociated with increased cTn values are presented in Table 1. The complexity of clinical circumstances may 
sometimes make it difficult to discriminate specific 
individual mechanism(s) of myocardial injury. In this 
situation, the multifactorial contributions resulting in 
myocardial injury should be described in the patient record.
6. CLINICAL PRESENTATIONS OF 
MYOCARDIAL INFARCTION
Onset of myocardial ischemia is the initial step in the 
development of MI and results from an imbalance be-
tween oxygen supply and demand. Myocardial ischemia 
in a clinical setting can most often be identified from the 
patient’s history and from the ECG. Possible ischemic 
symptoms include various combinations of chest, upper extremity, mandibular, or epigastric discomfort during exertion or at rest, or an ischemic equivalent such as 
dyspnea or fatigue. Often, the discomfort is diffuse; not 
localized, nor positional, nor affected by movement of 
the region. However, these symptoms are not specific 
for myocardial ischemia and can be observed in other conditions such as gastrointestinal, neurological, pul-monary, or musculoskeletal complaints. MI may occur with atypical symptoms such as palpitations or cardiac 
arrest, or even without symptoms.
12 Very brief episodes 
of ischemia too short to cause necrosis can also cause 
cTn release and elevations. The involved myocytes can subsequently die due to apoptosis.
42
If myocardial ischemia is present clinically or detect-
ed by ECG changes together with myocardial injury, 
manifested by a rising and/or falling pattern of cTn val-
ues, a diagnosis of acute MI is appropriate. If myocar -
dial ischemia is not present clinically, then elevated cTn 
levels may be indicative of acute myocardial injury if the pattern of values is rising and/or falling, or related to more chronic ongoing injury if the pattern is unchang-ing.
14 Similar considerations are relevant when evalu-
ating events that are potentially related to procedures that may cause myocardial injury and/or MI. Additional 
evaluations may lead to a need for the initial diagnosis 
to be revised.
Patients with suspected acute coronary syndrome 
(ACS) that are ruled out for MI with normal cardiac bio-marker values (≤99th percentile URL) may have unsta-
ble angina or an alternative diagnosis. These patients should be evaluated and treated accordingly.
11,43Criteria for Myocardial Injury
Detection of an elevated cTn value above the 
99th percentile URL is defined as myocardial in-jury. The injury is considered acute if there is a rise and/or fall of cTn values.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on November 12, 2025

November 13, 2018 Circulation. 2018;138:e618–e651. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000617 e624
CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINESThygesen et al 2018 ESC/ACC/AHA/WHF Fourth Universal Definition of MI
7. CLINICAL CLASSIFICATION OF 
MYOCARDIAL INFARCTION
For the sake of immediate treatment strategies such 
as reperfusion therapy, it is usual practice to designate 
MI in patients with chest discomfort or other ischemic 
symptoms, who develop new ST-segment elevations in 2 contiguous leads or new bundle branch blocks with 
ischemic repolarization patterns as an ST-elevation MI 
(STEMI) (see section 27). In contrast, patients without 
ST-segment elevation at presentation are usually des-
ignated non–ST-elevation MI (NSTEMI). The categories of patients with STEMI, NSTEMI, or unstable angina are customarily included in the concept of ACS. In addition 
to these categories, MI may be classified into various types based on pathological, clinical, and prognostic 
differences, along with different treatment strategies.
7.1. Myocardial Infarction Type 1
MI caused by atherothrombotic coronary artery dis-ease (CAD) and usually precipitated by atheroscle-
rotic plaque disruption (rupture or erosion) is desig-
nated as a type 1 MI. The relative burden of atherosclerosis and thrombosis in the culprit lesion 
varies greatly, and the dynamic thrombotic compo-nent may lead to distal coronary embolization result-
ing in myocyte necrosis.
44,45 Plaque rupture may not 
only be complicated by intraluminal thrombosis but also by hemorrhage into the plaque through the dis-rupted surface (Figure 3).
44,45
Criteria for Type 1 MI
Detection of a rise and/or fall of cTn values with 
at least 1 value above the 99th percentile URL and with at least 1 of the following:
• Symptoms of acute myocardial ischemia;
• New ischemic ECG changes;
•  Development of pathological Q waves;
•  Imaging evidence of new loss of viable myocar -
dium or new regional wall motion abnormality in a pattern consistent with an ischemic etiology;
•  Identification of a coronary thrombus by angi-ography including intracoronary imaging or by autopsy.*
cTn indicates cardiac troponin; ECG, electrocardiogram; URL, upper 
reference limit.
*Postmortem demonstration of an atherothrombus in the artery supplying 
the infarcted myocardium, or a macroscopically large circumscribed area of 
necrosis with or without intramyocardial hemorrhage, meets the type 1 MI 
criteria regardless of cTn values.Figure 2. Spectrum of myocardial injury, ranging from no injury to myocardial infarction.  Various clinical entities may involve these myocardial categories (eg, ventricular tachyarrhythmia, heart failure, kidney disease, hypotension/shock, hypoxemia and 
anemia). cTn indicates cardiac troponin; and URL upper reference limit.
*No myocardial injury, cTn values ≤99th percentile URL or not detectable.
†Myocardial injury, cTn values >99th percentile URL.
‡Myocardial infarction, clinical evidence of myocardial ischemia and a rise and/or fall of cTn values >99th percentile URL.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on November 12, 2025

Thygesen et al 2018 ESC/ACC/AHA/WHF Fourth Universal Definition of MI
Circulation. 2018;138:e618–e651. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000617 November 13, 2018
 e625
CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINESIt is essential to integrate the ECG findings with the 
aim of classifying type 1 MI into STEMI or NSTEMI in 
order to establish the appropriate treatment according to current Guidelines.
46,47
7.2. Myocardial Infarction Type 2
The pathophysiological mechanism leading to ischemic myocardial injury in the context of a mismatch between oxygen supply and demand has been classified as type 
2 MI.
10,12 By definition, acute atherothrombotic plaque 
disruption is not a feature of type 2 MI. In patients with 
stable known or presumed CAD, an acute stressor such as an acute gastrointestinal bleed with a precipitous 
drop in hemoglobin or a sustained tachyarrhythmia 
with clinical manifestations of myocardial ischemia, 
may result in myocardial injury and a type 2 MI. These 
effects are due to insufficient blood flow to the ischemic 
myocardium to meet the increased myocardial oxygen demand of the stressor. Ischemic thresholds may vary substantially in individual patients depending on the magnitude of the stressor, the presence of  noncardiac 
comorbidities, and the extent of underlying CAD and 
cardiac structural abnormalities.
Studies have shown variable occurrences of type 2 MI 
depending on criteria used for diagnosis. Some reports 
rely on specific predetermined oxygen mismatch crite-ria,
48,49 whereas others apply more liberal criteria. Most 
studies show a higher frequency of type 2 MI in women. 
The short- and long-term mortality rates for patients with 
type 2 MI are generally higher than for type 1 MI patients 
in most but not all studies due to an increased preva-lence of comorbid conditions.
49–57 Coronary atheroscle-
rosis is a common finding in type 2 MI patients selected 
for coronary angiography. In general, these patients have 
a worse prognosis than those without CAD.54–57 Prospec-
tive evaluations of the importance of CAD with type 2 MI 
using consistent definitions and approaches are needed.
It has been shown that the frequency of ST-segment 
elevation in type 2 MI varies from 3% to 24%.53 In some 
cases, coronary embolism caused by thrombi, calcium or 
vegetation from the atria or ventricles, or acute aortic dis-
section may result in a type 2 MI. Spontaneous coronary 
artery dissection with or without intramural hematoma is another non-atherosclerotic condition that may occur, especially in young women. It is defined as spontaneous 
dissection of the coronary artery wall with accumulation 
of blood within the false lumen, which can compress the true lumen to varying degrees (Figure 4).
58
All of the clinical information available should be con-
sidered in distinguishing type 1 MI from type 2 MI. The context and mechanisms of type 2 MI should be consid-
ered when establishing this diagnosis (Figure 5). The myo-
cardial oxygen supply/demand imbalance attributable to acute myocardial ischemia may be multifactorial, related 
either to: reduced myocardial perfusion due to fixed coro-
nary atherosclerosis without plaque rupture, coronary ar -
tery spasm, coronary microvascular dysfunction (which includes endothelial dysfunction, smooth muscle cell dys-
function, and the dysregulation of sympathetic innerva-
tion), coronary embolism, coronary artery dissection with or without intramural hematoma or other mechanisms that reduce oxygen supply such as severe bradyarrhyth-
mia, respiratory failure with severe hypoxemia severe ane-
mia, and hypotension/shock; or to increased myocardial 
oxygen demand due to sustained tachyarrhythmia or se-
vere hypertension with or without left ventricular hyper -
trophy. In patients who undergo timely coronary angiog-raphy, description of a ruptured plaque with thrombus in Table 1. Reasons for the Elevation of Cardiac Troponin Values Because 
of Myocardial Injury
Myocardial injury related to acute myocardial ischemia
 Atherosclerotic plaque disruption with thrombosis
Myocardial injury related to acute myocardial ischemia because of oxygen 
supply/demand imbalance
 Reduced myocardial perfusion, eg,
  •  Coronary artery spasm, microvascular dysfunction
  •  Coronary embolism
  •  Coronary artery dissection
  •  Sustained bradyarrhythmia
  •  Hypotension or shock
  •  Respiratory failure
  •  Severe anemia
 Increased myocardial oxygen demand, eg,
  •  Sustained tachyarrhythmia
  •  Severe hypertension with or without left ventricular hypertrophy
Other causes of myocardial injury Cardiac conditions, eg,
  •  Heart failure
  •  Myocarditis
  •  Cardiomyopathy (any type)
  •  Takotsubo syndrome
  •  Coronary revascularization procedure
  •  Cardiac procedure other than revascularization
  •  Catheter ablation
  •  Defibrillator shocks
  •  Cardiac contusion
 Systemic conditions, eg,
  •  Sepsis, infectious disease
  •  Chronic kidney disease
  •  Stroke, subarachnoid hemorrhage
  •  Pulmonary embolism, pulmonary hypertension
  •  Infiltrative diseases, eg, amyloidosis, sarcoidosis
  •  Chemotherapeutic agents
  •  Critically ill patients
  •  Strenuous exercise
For a more comprehensive listing, see references 39-41.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on November 12, 2025

November 13, 2018 Circulation. 2018;138:e618–e651. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000617 e626
CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINESThygesen et al 2018 ESC/ACC/AHA/WHF Fourth Universal Definition of MI
the infarct-related artery may be helpful in making the 
distinction between type 2 MI vs. type 1 MI, but angi-
ography is not always definitive, clinically indicated, or 
required to establish the diagnosis of type 2 MI.
It appears advisable in the acute setting to treat the 
underlying ischemic imbalance of oxygen supply and de-mand. This treatment may include volume adjustment, blood pressure management, administration of blood products, heart-rate control, and respiratory support.
47,48 
Depending on the clinical situation, coronary evaluations may be indicated to assess the likelihood of CAD. If it is present, the MI Guidelines may be applied in accordance 
with the ECG findings of STEMI or NSTEMI.
46,47 However, 
if CAD is absent, the benefits of cardiovascular risk re-
duction strategies with type 2 MI remain uncertain.
7.3. Myocardial Infarction Type 2 and 
Myocardial Injury
Type 2 MI and myocardial injury are frequently en-
countered in clinical practice and both are related to a poor outcome.13,14,49,51,56 A conceptual model to fa-
cilitate the clinical distinction between acute ischemic 
myocardial injury with or without an acute athero-
thrombotic event (type 1 or type 2 MI) vs. conditions without acute ischemic myocardial injury is displayed 
in Figure 6. Acute MI requires a rising and/or falling 
pattern of cTn values. Acute myocardial injury may also manifest such a pattern but if the injury is relat-ed to structural heart disease, the cTn values may be 
stable and unchanging. Type 2 MI and nonischemic 
myocardial injury may coexist. It should be recognized 
that some disease entities may be on both sides of 
the diagram (eg, acute heart failure that may occur in the context of acute myocardial ischemia). Neverthe-less, abnormal cTn values in the setting of acute and/
or chronic heart failure are often better categorized 
as a myocardial injury condition. Few studies have compared the incidence and clinical features of type 
2 MI versus myocardial injury without acute myocar -
dial ischemia.
7.4. Myocardial Infarction Type 3
The detection of cardiac biomarkers in the blood is 
fundamental for establishing the diagnosis of MI.10,12 
However, patients can manifest a typical presentation of myocardial ischemia/infarction, including pre-sumed new ischemic ECG changes or ventricular fi-
brillation, and die before it is possible to obtain blood 
for cardiac biomarker determination; or the patient may succumb soon after the onset of symptoms be-fore an elevation of biomarker values has occurred. 
Such patients are designated as having a type 3 MI, 
when suspicion for an acute myocardial ischemic event is high, even when cardiac biomarker evidence 
of MI is lacking.
10,12 This category allows the separa-
tion of fatal MI events from the much larger group of Criteria for Type 2 MI
Detection of a rise and/or fall of cTn values with at 
least 1 value above the 99th percentile URL, and evi-dence of an imbalance between myocardial oxygen supply and demand unrelated to acute coronary ath-erothrombosis, requiring at least 1 of the following:
•  Symptoms of acute myocardial ischemia;
•  New ischemic ECG changes;
•  Development of pathological Q waves;
•  Imaging evidence of new loss of viable myocar -
dium or new regional wall motion abnormality in a pattern consistent with an ischemic etiologyFigure 3. Myocardial infarction type 1.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on November 12, 2025

Thygesen et al 2018 ESC/ACC/AHA/WHF Fourth Universal Definition of MI
Circulation. 2018;138:e618–e651. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000617 November 13, 2018 e627
CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINESsudden death episodes that may be cardiac (nonisch-
emic) or noncardiac in origin. When a type 3 MI is diagnosed and a subsequent autopsy reveals recent evidence of an MI, with a fresh or recent thrombus in the infarct-related artery, the type 3 MI should be re-
classified to a type 1 MI. Original investigations ad-
dressing the incidence of type 3 MI are sparse, but a study showed an annual incidence below 10/100 000 
person-years and a frequency of 3% to 4% among all types of MI.
60Criteria for Type 3 MI
Patients who suffer cardiac death, with symptoms 
suggestive of myocardial ischemia accompanied by presumed new ischemic ECG changes or ventricu-lar fibrillation, but die before blood samples for biomarkers can be obtained, or before increases in cardiac biomarkers can be identified, or MI is detected by autopsy examination.
Figure 4. Myocardial infarction type 2.
Figure 5. Framework for type 2 myocardial infarction considering the clinical context and pathophysiological mechanisms attributable to acute 
myocardial ischemia.  
The illustration above is modified from Januzzi and Sandoval.59
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on November 12, 2025

November 13, 2018 Circulation. 2018;138:e618–e651. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000617 e628
CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINESThygesen et al 2018 ESC/ACC/AHA/WHF Fourth Universal Definition of MI
8. CORONARY PROCEDURE–RELATED 
MYOCARDIAL INJURY
Cardiac procedural myocardial injury related to coro-
nary revascularization procedures, whether percutane-ous coronary intervention (PCI) or coronary artery by-pass grafting (CABG), may be temporally related to the procedure itself, reflecting periprocedural issues, or may occur later reflecting complications of a device, such as early or late stent thrombosis or in-stent reste-nosis for PCI, or graft occlusion or stenosis with CABG. Late gadolinium enhancement (LGE) cardiac magnetic resonance (CMR) allows assessment of procedural myo-cardial injury
61–63 When quantifying procedural injury 
using LGE-CMR before and shortly after PCI or CABG, it was found that 32% of patients had evidence of pro-cedural myocardial injury.
63 Furthermore, it has been 
shown that patients with elevation of cTnI values after PCI or after CABG have evidence of procedural myocar -
dial injury on CMR imaging.
61,62 For that reason, in-
creased cTn values detected following a coronary revas-cularization procedure may reflect procedural myocardial injury. Of importance, if the baseline value before the procedure is above the 99th percentile URL, it is essen-tial that cTn levels are stable prior to the evaluation in order to reliably establish the presence of acute proce-
dural myocardial injury. It is not possible to determine, 
when intervening in a patient with an acute MI event 
resulting in an increased cTn level, how much of any given increase is related to the MI and how much is due 
to the procedure.
A large proportion of patients have abnor -
mal values of cTn after PCI, ranging from ~20% 
to 40% in stable CAD to 40% to 50% in MI.
64 
The occurrence of procedural myocardial injury 
can be detected by the measurement of cTn be-
fore the procedure and repeated 3–6 hours later. Criteria for Cardiac Procedural Myocardial 
Injury
Cardiac procedural myocardial injury is arbitrarily 
defined by increases of cTn values (>99th per -
centile URL) in patients with normal baseline val-ues (≤99th percentile URL) or a rise of cTn values >20% of the baseline value when it is above the 99th percentile URL but it is stable or falling.Figure 6. A model for interpreting myocardial injury.  
Ischemic thresholds vary substantially in relation to the magnitude of the stressor and the extent of underlying cardiac disease. MI indicates myocardial infarction; 
URL, upper reference limit.
*Stable denotes ≤20% variation of troponin values in the appropriate clinical context.
†Ischemia denotes signs and/or symptoms of clinical myocardial ischemia.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on November 12, 2025

Thygesen et al 2018 ESC/ACC/AHA/WHF Fourth Universal Definition of MI
Circulation. 2018;138:e618–e651. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000617 November 13, 2018
 e629
CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINESWhere the second value is rising, further sampling  
should be performed to document the peak cTn val-
ue. Increasing levels after the procedure can only be attributed with certainty to procedural myocardial in-
jury when the preprocedural cTn values are normal (≤99th percentile URL), or if they are stable or falling. 
For patients that present with an ACS and undergo a prompt coronary revascularization procedure result-
ing in only a single preprocedural baseline value that 
is normal or mildly elevated, followed by subsequent postprocedural values that continue to increase, the 
postprocedural increase should be attributed to the 
index event. Recent data corroborate the importance 
of elevated preprocedure cTn values as a prognostic 
marker in patients that have values that rise after the procedure.
65 To diagnose procedural myocardial 
injury in the clinical setting of only a single prepro-cedural cTn value, the cardiac Tn values would need 
to be stable or falling postprocedure, followed by a 
subsequent increase that exceeds the 99th percentile 
URL, and if the value has not returned to baseline, 
the increase should be >20% with an absolute value greater than the 99th percentile URL.
9. MYOCARDIAL INFARCTION 
ASSOCIATED WITH PERCUTANEOUS 
CORONARY INTERVENTION (TYPE 4A 
MYOCARDIAL INFARCTION)
Stand-alone postprocedural increases of cTn values 
are sufficient to establish a diagnosis of procedural 
myocardial injury but not for the diagnosis of type 4a 
MI. Type 4a MI requires an elevation of cTn values >5 
times the 99th percentile URL in patients with normal 
baseline values or, in patients with elevated preproce-
dure cTn in whom the cTn levels are stable (≤20% 
variation) or falling, the postprocedure cTn must rise 
>20% to an absolute value >5 times the 99th percen-
tile URL. In addition, there should be evidence of new myocardial ischemia, either from ECG changes, imag-
ing evidence, or from procedure-related complica-
tions associated with reduced coronary blood flow 
such as coronary dissection, occlusion of a major epi-
cardial artery or a side branch occlusion/thrombus, 
disruption of collateral flow, slow flow or no-reflow, 
or distal embolization. The use of hs-cTn assays to di-agnose type 4a MI (and type 5 MI) is an area of active 
research. Many hs-cTn assays are available, which 
have wide dynamic ranges. Different criteria may be 
required for different assays. However, it has recently 
been shown that the optimal hs-cTnT thresholds to predict cardiovascular events at 30 days and 1 year 
were very close to the 5-fold increase suggested by 
the Third Universal Definition of Myocardial infarc-
tion.
12,66,67 These criteria are therefore retained be-cause of a lack of new scientific evidence that identi-
fies superior criteria for defining this MI subtype. Other criteria that meet the definition of type 4a MI, regardless of hs-cTn or cTn values, are the develop-ment of new pathological Q waves or autopsy evi-dence of recent procedure-related thrombus in the culprit artery.
10. STENT/SCAFFOLD THROMBOSIS 
ASSOCIATED WITH PERCUTANEOUS CORONARY INTERVENTION (TYPE 4B 
MYOCARDIAL INFARCTION)
A subcategory of PCI-related MI is stent/scaffold throm-
bosis, type 4b MI, as documented by angiography or autopsy using the same criteria utilized for type 1 MI. It is important to indicate the time of the occurrence of the stent/scaffold thrombosis in relation to the timing of the PCI procedure. The following temporal catego-ries are suggested: acute, 0 to 24 hours; subacute, >24 hours to 30 days; late, >30 days to 1 year; and very late >1 year after stent/scaffold implantation.
68Criteria for PCI-Related MI ≤48 Hours After 
the Index Procedure (Type 4a MI)
Coronary intervention–related MI is arbitrarily 
defined by an elevation of cTn values >5 times the 99th percentile URL in patients with normal base-line values. In patients with elevated preprocedure cTn in whom the cTn level are stable (≤20% varia-tion) or falling, the postprocedure cTn must rise by >20%. However, the absolute postprocedural value must still be at least 5 times the 99th percen-tile URL. In addition, 1 of the following elements is required:•  New ischemic ECG changes;
•  Development of new pathological Q waves*;
•  Imaging evidence of new loss of viable myo-cardium or new regional wall motion abnor -
mality in a pattern consistent with an ischemic etiology;
•  Angiographic findings consistent with a proce-dural flow-limiting complication such as coronary dissection, occlusion of a major epicardial artery or a side branch occlusion/thrombus, disruption of collateral flow, or distal embolization.†
* 
Isolated development of new pathological Q waves meets the type 4a 
MI criteria if cTn values are elevated and rising but <5 times the 99th 
percentile URL.
† Postmortem demonstration of a procedure-related thrombus in the culprit artery, or a macroscopically large circumscribed area of necrosis 
with or without intra-myocardial hemorrhage meets the type 4a MI 
criteria.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on November 12, 2025

Thygesen et al 2018 ESC/ACC/AHA/WHF Fourth Universal Definition of MI
November 13, 2018 Circulation. 2018;138:e618–e651. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000617
 e630
CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINES11. RESTENOSIS ASSOCIATED 
WITH PERCUTANEOUS CORONARY INTERVENTION (TYPE 4C MYOCARDIAL INFARCTION)
Occasionally MI occurs and—at angiography, in-stent 
restenosis, or restenosis following balloon angioplasty in the infarct territory—is the only angiographic expla-nation since no other culprit lesion or thrombus can be identified. This PCI-related MI type is designated as type 4c MI, defined as focal or diffuse restenosis, or a com-plex lesion associated with a rise and/or fall of cTn val-ues above the 99th percentile URL applying, the same criteria utilized for type 1 MI.
12. MYOCARDIAL INFARCTION 
ASSOCIATED WITH CORONARY ARTERY BYPASS GRAFTING (TYPE 5 MYOCARDIAL INFARCTION)
Numerous factors can lead to procedural myocardial 
injury during a CABG procedure. Many of them are related to the details of the cardiac preservation, the extent of the direct traumatic injury to the myocar -
dium, as well as any potential ischemic injury. For that reason, increases in cTn values should be expected af-ter all CABG procedures,
69,70 which need to be taken 
into account when comparing the extent of procedur -
al myocardial injury after cardiac surgery with that as-sociated with less invasive approaches. Depending on whether it is off-pump or on-pump surgery, procedural myocardial injury is observed among 32% to 44% of CABG patients when quantified by LGE-CMR.
61,63 The 
area under the curve (AUC) and routine cTn sampling has demonstrated an excellent linear relationship with the mass of the new injury as defined by LGE-CMR. AUC for CK-MB is also good, although clearly inferior to cTnI.
69 However, these relationships vary depending 
on the nature of the procedure, the nature of the car -
dioplegia, and the specific assay used to measure cTn. Very high cTn values are most often associated with coronary artery–related events.
61,63,69 Thus, although 
cardiac biomarkers and especially cTn appear robust for the detection of procedural myocardial injury and also, in the presence of new myocardial ischemia, for the detection of type 5 MI, a specific cut-off value for all procedures and all cTn assays is difficult to define. However, in order to ensure consistency with the anal-ogous standards of the preceding definition of type 5 MI
12 and because of the lack of new scientific evi-
dence that identifies superior criteria for defining this MI subtype, it is suggested that a cTn value >10 times the 99th percentile URL is applied as the cut-off point during the first 48 hours following CABG, occurring from a normal baseline cTn value (≤99th percentile 
URL), for diagnosing type 5 MI. It is important that the postprocedural elevation of cTn values is accompanied by ECG, angiographic, or imaging evidence of new 
myocardial ischemia/new loss of myocardial viability.
71 
The higher cut-off of MI after CABG than after PCI (10 
times versus 5 times the 99th percentile URL) has been arbitrarily selected due to the occurrence of more un-avoidable myocardial injury during surgery than dur -
ing PCI.
It should be recognized that ST-segment deviation 
and T wave changes are common after CABG due to epicardial injury, and are not reliable indicators of myo-cardial ischemia in this setting. However, ST-segment elevation with reciprocal ST-segment depression or oth-
er specific ECG patterns may be a more reliable finding 
of a potential ischemic event.
Marked isolated elevation of cTn values within the 
48 hour postoperative period, even in the absence of 
ECG/angiographic or other imaging evidence of MI, 
indicates prognostically significant cardiac procedural 
myocardial injury.
72 The presence of significant pro-
cedural myocardial injury in patients with operative problems (eg, difficulty coming off bypass, technically difficult anastomoses in a heavily calcified aorta, of perioperative evidence of myocardial ischemia, etc) should prompt clinical review of the procedure and/or 
consideration of additional diagnostic testing for pos-
sible type 5 MI.Criteria for CABG-Related MI ≤48 Hours After 
the Index Procedure (Type 5 MI)
CABG-related MI is arbitrarily defined as eleva-
tion of cTn values >10 times the 99th percentile URL in patients with normal baseline cTn val-ues. In patients with elevated preprocedure cTn in whom cTn levels are stable (≤20% variation) or falling, the postprocedure cTn must rise by >20%. However, the absolute postprocedural value still must be >10 times the 99th percentile URL. In addition, 1 of the following elements is required:
•  Development of new pathological Q waves*;
•  Angiographic documented new graft occlu-sion or new native coronary artery occlusion;
•  Imaging evidence of new loss of viable myo-cardium or new regional wall motion abnor -
mality in a pattern consistent with an ischemic etiology.
*
Isolated development of new pathological Q waves meets the type 5 
MI criteria if cTn values are elevated and rising but <10 times the 99th 
percentile URL.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on November 12, 2025

Thygesen et al 2018 ESC/ACC/AHA/WHF Fourth Universal Definition of MI
Circulation. 2018;138:e618–e651. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000617 November 13, 2018
 e631
CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINES13. OTHER DEFINITIONS OF 
MYOCARDIAL INFARCTION RELATED 
TO PERCUTANEOUS CORONARY 
INTERVENTION OR CORONARY ARTERY BYPASS GRAFTING
There is no universal consensus on the cTn or hs-cTn 
cut-off points that clearly distinguish cardiac procedural myocardial injury from MI. The distinction is made on the basis of an injury created by a flow-limiting com-plication during the procedure that results in sufficient myocardial ischemia to generate a procedure-related 
MI. The size of the insult will determine the magnitude 
of the cTn release. Various groups have used multiples 
of the 99th percentile URL and set thresholds to diag-
nose periprocedural MIs for clinical trials.
68,73 Unless a 
standard assay is used for all analyses, given the hetero-
geneity of cTn assays, this approach could lead to very different values depending on the assay used locally. The Academic Research Consortium-2 (ARC-2) sug-gests a postprocedural cTn value ≥35 times the 99th percentile URL for both PCI and CABG in patients that have a normal baseline cTn value or in patients with el-
evated preprocedure cTn values in whom the cTn levels 
are stable or falling. ARC-2 proposes that 1 ancillary 
criterion be required in addition to the ≥35 cTn rise to 
fulfill the definition of periprocedural MI. The ancillary criteria are ≥1 of the following: new significant Q waves (or equivalent), flow-limiting angiographic complica-tions in a major epicardial vessel or >1.5 mm diameter branch, or a substantial new loss of viable myocardium on echocardiography related to the procedure.
68 Fur-
thermore, ARC-2 has defined stand-alone criteria for significant procedural myocardial injury if the rise in cTn is ≥70 times the 99th percentile URL (where the baseline is lower than the URL, elevated and stable, or falling).
68
14. RECURRENT MYOCARDIAL 
INFARCTION
Incident MI is defined as the individual’s first MI. When 
features of MI occur in the first 28 days after an inci-dent event, the second event is not counted as a new MI for epidemiological purposes. If characteristics of MI occur after 28 days following an incident MI, it is con-sidered to be a recurrent MI.
11
15. REINFARCTION
The term reinfarction is used clinically for an acute MI that occurs within 28 days of an incident or recurrent MI.
11 The ECG diagnosis of suspected reinfarction fol-
lowing the initial MI may be confounded by the ini-tial evolutionary ECG changes. Reinfarction should be 
considered when ST-elevation ≥1 mm recurs or new 
pathognomonic Q waves appear in at least 2 contigu-ous leads, particularly when associated with ischemic 
symptoms. However, reelevation of the ST-segment 
can also be seen in threatened myocardial rupture or in cases of pericarditis, and should lead to additional 
diagnostic evaluation.
In patients where reinfarction is suspected from clini-
cal signs or symptoms following the initial MI, an imme-
diate measurement of cTn is recommended. A second 
sample should be obtained 3 to 6 hours later or earlier with more sensitive cTn assays. If the cTn concentra-
tion is elevated, but stable or decreasing at the time 
of suspected reinfarction, the diagnosis of reinfarction requires a >20% increase of the cTn value in the second 
sample.
74 If the initial cTn concentration is normal, the 
criteria for new acute MI apply.12
16. MYOCARDIAL INJURY AND 
INFARCTION ASSOCIATED WITH CARDIAC PROCEDURES OTHER THAN REVASCULARIZATION
Cardiac procedures such as transcatheter valve inter -
ventions may cause myocardial injury, both by direct 
trauma to the myocardium and by creating regional 
ischemia secondary to coronary obstruction or embo-lization. Ablation of arrhythmias involves controlled 
procedural myocardial injury by application of warming 
or cooling of the tissue. The extent of procedural myo-
cardial injury can be assessed by serial cTn measure-
ments. Increases of cTn values in this context should be considered as a procedural myocardial injury and not 
labeled as an MI unless the biomarker criteria and 1 of 
the ancillary criteria for acute myocardial ischemia listed for type 5 MI are present.
75,76
17. MYOCARDIAL INJURY AND 
INFARCTION ASSOCIATED WITH  NONCARDIAC PROCEDURES
Perioperative MI is one of the most important compli-
cations in major noncardiac surgery and it is associated 
with a poor prognosis.77,78 Most patients who have a 
perioperative MI will not experience ischemic symptoms 
due to anesthesia sedation, or pain relieving medica-tions. Nevertheless, asymptomatic perioperative MI is as 
strongly associated with 30 day mortality as symptom-
atic MI.
77,78 Knowledge about hs-cTn values at baseline 
can help to identify patients having chronic cTn eleva-tion before surgery, as well as those at increased risk during and after the procedure.
79,80 Measurement of 
hs-cTn in postoperative samples reveals that as many 
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on November 12, 2025

Thygesen et al 2018 ESC/ACC/AHA/WHF Fourth Universal Definition of MI
November 13, 2018 Circulation. 2018;138:e618–e651. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000617
 e632
CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINESas 35% of patients have levels above the 99th percen-
tile URL, and 17% have an elevation and a rising pat-
tern of values indicative of evolving myocar-dial injury.81 
Those with a rising pattern of elevated hs-cTn values 
are at particular risk; the greater the rise, the greater 
the risk.82,83
The pathophysiological mechanism of perioperative 
MI is subject to debate. It is recognized that the peri-operative period is characterized by increased cardiac 
metabolic demand that may lead to MI in patients with otherwise stable CAD.
84,85 Thus, an angiographic in-
vestigation has identified demand myocardial ischemia 
as the predominant etiology of perioperative MI,84,85 
which together with a rise and/or fall of cTn values in-dicates type 2 MI. However, other angiographic studies 
have detected coronary plaque rupture in 50% to 60% 
of patients with perioperative MI,
86,87 which qualifies as 
type 1 MI. On the other hand, perioperative myocardial 
injury without ancillary ischemic evidence indicative of 
MI is a common complication after noncardiac surgery 
that is associated with substantial short- and long-term 
mortality on a level with perioperative MI.83
Postoperative cTn surveillance is recommended for 
high-risk individuals. In order to properly interpret the etiology of elevated postoperative values, a baseline 
preoperative value is necessary to determine whether 
the increase is acute or more chronic. However, a diag-
nosis of MI still requires, in addition to an increase of cTn values, evidence of myocardial ischemia that may 
be evident from the peri- and postoperative period (eg, 
ST-segment changes on telemetry/ECG, repeated epi-sodes of hypoxia, hypotension, tachycardia, or imaging 
evidence of MI). In the absence of evidence for acute 
myocardial ischemia, a diagnosis of acute myocardial 
injury is more appropriate. Ongoing research suggests 
the possibility that interventions may be helpful in this clinical situation.
18. MYOCARDIAL INJURY OR 
INFARCTION ASSOCIATED WITH 
HEART FAILURE
Depending on the assay used, detectable to clearly el-
evated cTn values being indicative of myocardial injury 
may be seen in patients with heart failure (HF), both 
with reduced ejection fraction (EF) and with preserved EF.
88 Using hs-cTn assays, measurable hs-cTn concen-
trations may be present in nearly all patients with HF, 
with a significant percentage exceeding the 99th per -
centile URL, particularly in those patients with more severe HF syndromes, such as in acutely decompen-
sated HF.
87
Beyond type 1 MI, multiple mechanisms have been 
proposed to explain measurable to pathologically ele-
vated cTn concentrations in patients with HF.88,89 For ex-ample, type 2 MI may result from increased transmural 
pressure, small-vessel coronary obstruction, endothelial 
dysfunction, anemia, or hypotension. Besides type 1 MI or type 2 MI, cardiomyocyte apoptosis and autophagy due to wall stretch have been experimentally demon-
strated. Direct cellular toxicity related to inflammation, 
circulating neurohormones, and infiltrative processes may present with HF and abnormal cTn measurements indicating myocardial injury. Finally, exocytosis of the 
early releasable cytosolic troponin pool into the blood stream from stressed cardiomyocytes has also been 
suggested as a cause of elevated cTn values.
89
In the context of an acutely decompensated HF pre-
sentation, cTn should always be promptly measured 
and the ECG recorded, with the goal of identifying or 
excluding myocardial ischemia as the precipitant. In this setting, elevated cTn values should be interpreted with a high level of suspicion for type 1 MI if a significant 
rise and/or fall of the marker is seen, especially if it is 
accompanied by chest discomfort or other symptoms suggestive of myocardial ischemia, and/ or if new isch-
emic ECG changes or loss of myocardial function on 
noninvasive testing are found. Shortness of breath, the 
cardinal symptom of acutely decompensated HF, may 
be an ischemic equivalent, but in the absence of cor -
roborating evidence for a coronary mechanism, caution is advised in its interpretation. Coronary artery anato-
my may be known and this knowledge may be used 
to interpret abnormal cTn results. However, further 
information—such as renal function, myocardial perfu-
sion studies, coronary angiography, or CMR—is often required to better understand the cause of deviant cTn 
values.
19. TAKOTSUBO SYNDROME
Takotsubo syndrome (TTS) can mimic MI and is found in 1% to 2% of patients presenting with suspected 
STEMI.
90 The onset of TTS is often triggered by intense 
emotional or physical stresses, such as bereavement. 
Over 90% of patients are postmenopausal women. Car -
diovascular complications occur in 50% of patients pre-senting with TTS, and the inpatient mortality is similar to 
STEMI (4% to 5%) due to cardiogenic shock, ventricular 
rupture, or malignant arrhythmias.
90 TTS usually pres-
ents similar to ACS. ST-segment elevation is frequent (44%), but the extent of the ST-segment elevation is 
usually widespread across the lateral and precordial leads, beyond that of a single coronary artery distribu-
tion. ST-segment depression occurs in <10% of patients 
and after 12 to 24 hours, deep, symmetric T wave inver -
sion and QTc prolongation are typically observed.
91,92
There are usually transient elevations in cTn levels 
(>95% of cases), but the peak cTn values observed are modest, and contrast with the large territory of ECG changes or left ventricular (LV) dysfunction. The rise 
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on November 12, 2025

Thygesen et al 2018 ESC/ACC/AHA/WHF Fourth Universal Definition of MI
Circulation. 2018;138:e618–e651. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000617 November 13, 2018
 e633
CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINESand fall in cTn levels support an acute myocardial in-
jury, secondary to the high catecholamine surges that 
are known to trigger cTn release from cardiomyocytes. 
Coronary vasospasm, high myocardial strain hypercon-tractility, or high ventricular afterload may also contrib-
ute to myocardial ischemia. The diagnosis of TTS should 
be suspected when the clinical manifestations and ECG 
abnormalities are out of proportion to the degree of el-
evation of cTn values, and when the distribution of the 
LV wall motion abnormalities does not correlate with a 
single coronary artery distribution. However, coronary angiography and ventriculography are often needed to 
secure the diagnosis.
In most cases, the coronary arteries are angiographi-
cally normal, and where CAD is present (15% cases) it is not sufficient to explain the observed pattern of 
regional wall motion abnormalities. Left ventriculog-
raphy during catheterization and/or echocardiography 
may show a variety of LV regional wall motion abnor -
malities including apical (82% of patients), mid-ventricular 
(14.6%), basal (2.2%), or focal (1.5%) akinesis or hy-
pokinesis in a circumferential pattern involving >1 cor -
onary artery territory. Evidence of myocardial edema is 
often seen on CMR imaging during the acute phase 
but LGE is usually absent. The recovery time for LV 
function varies from hours to several weeks.
93 Cardiac 
function may not return to normal, with persisting abnormalities of diastolic function, myocardial reserve 
during exercise, or rhythm disturbances at long-term 
follow-up in 10% to 15% of patients. In the absence 
of recovery of regional wall motion abnormalities, LGE-CMR is recommended to exclude MI with sponta-
neous recanalization.
The distinction between MI and TTS can be chal-
lenging, particularly when concurrent CAD is present 
(15% in the International Takotsubo Registry).
91 Two 
additional features that are helpful in distinguishing TTS 
from acute MI are QTc prolongation >500 ms during 
the acute phase and the recovery of LV function over 
2 to 4 weeks. There are rare cases described where MI 
and TTS coexist (eg, MI-induced TTS or TTS with sec-ondary plaque rupture) but this occurs where the acute 
regional wall motion abnormalities are more extensive 
than the culprit coronary artery territory, and fulfil the pattern and definition of TTS.
94
20. MYOCARDIAL INFARCTION WITH 
NONOBSTRUCTIVE CORONARY 
ARTERIES
It is increasingly recognized that there is a group of MI 
patients with no angiographic obstructive CAD (≥50% diameter stenosis in a major epicardial vessel), and the 
term myocardial infarction with nonobstructive coro-
nary arteries (MINOCA) has been coined for this en-tity.95,96 The diagnosis of MINOCA, like the diagnosis of 
MI, indicates that there is an ischemic mechanism re-
sponsible for the myocyte injury (ie, nonischemic causes 
such as myocarditis have been excluded). Furthermore, the diagnosis of MINOCA necessitates that obstructive 
CAD has not been inadvertently overlooked (eg, spon-
taneous coronary artery dissection). The prevalence of 
MINOCA is estimated to be 6% to 8% among patients 
diagnosed with MI and more common in women than 
men, as well as in patients presenting with NSTEMI 
compared with those presenting with STEMI.
96–98 Ath-
erosclerotic plaque disruption and coronary thrombosis 
may be a cause of MINOCA (ie, type 1 MI). However, 
coronary spasm and spontaneous coronary dissection 
may be involved as well (ie, type 2 MI). along with other 
possible causes. Additional coronary imaging and func-
tional testing methods may be useful to elucidate the 
mechanisms of ischemia in MINOCA.46
21. MYOCARDIAL INJURY AND/OR  
INFARCTION ASSOCIATED WITH 
KIDNEY DISEASE
Many patients with chronic kidney disease (CKD) have 
elevation of cTn values.99,100 With hs-cTn assays, the 
majority of patients with end-stage renal disease will 
have elevation of hs-cTn values above the 99th per -
centile URL.99,101 This is particularly the case for hs-
cTnT, which is more often elevated compared with hs-cTnI.
99,102 It has been shown using hs-cTn assays 
that renal dysfunction is commonly associated with cardiovascular abnormalities.
102–104 In autopsy studies, 
elevation of cTn values was invariably associated with evidence of myocardial injury.
15 Recently, a minor effect 
on renal clearance of cTn has been shown when lev-els are low, but not in response to acute episodes of 
myocardial injury.
105 The mechanisms include increased 
ventricular pressure, small-vessel coronary obstruction, 
anemia, hypotension, and possibly direct toxic effects 
on the myocardium associated with the uremic state.89 
Cardiomyocyte apoptosis and autophagy due to acute 
wall stretch have been demonstrated experimentally.18 
Thus, baseline elevation of cTn values is common, and because they reflect myocardial injury, such elevation is 
highly prognostic over time.
99
Diagnosing MI in patients with CKD and elevated 
cTn levels may be difficult if symptoms or ECG changes 
indicating myocardial ischemia are absent. However, 
studies suggest that serial changes in cTn levels are 
equally effective in diagnosing MI in patients with CKD 
and in those with normal renal function.106 If the level 
of elevated cTn values is unchanging, and the timing of the event makes a rising and/or falling pattern unlikely, 
the elevated level, even if substantial, is likely a reflec-
tion of chronic myocardial injury. This does not imply 
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on November 12, 2025

Thygesen et al 2018 ESC/ACC/AHA/WHF Fourth Universal Definition of MI
November 13, 2018 Circulation. 2018;138:e618–e651. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000617
 e634
CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINESthat these patients are free of CAD, since renal dys-
function and CAD are correlated. However, if a rising and/or falling pattern is present then the etiology of the abnormal cTn values could be acute volume over-load, congestive HF, or MI. If a rising and falling pattern is seen, and it is accompanied by ischemic symptoms, new ischemic ECG changes, or loss of viable myocardi-
um on imaging, a diagnosis of acute MI is likely. There 
are no data to suggest that different criteria for the cTn 
decision levels are needed for these patients. At times, 
additional imaging studies may be necessary to deter -
mine the appropriate diagnosis. It should be noted that 
if CKD patients present late after the onset of chest 
pain, it may be difficult to observe a rise and/or fall 
of cTn values in the short term, particularly when the baseline value is elevated. Such a situation should not obviate the diagnosis of MI when the clinical evidence is strong.
22. MYOCARDIAL INJURY AND/OR 
INFARCTION IN CRITICALLY ILL PATIENTS
Elevations of cTn values are common in patients in 
the intensive care unit and are associated with ad-verse prognosis regardless of the underlying disease state.
107,108 Some elevation of cTn values may reflect 
type 2 MI due to underlying CAD and increased myo-cardial oxygen demand,
109 whereas in other patients, 
type 1 MI may occur because of plaque disruption lead-ing to thrombosis in a coronary artery. However, other 
patients may have elevated cTn values and marked de-
creases in EF due to sepsis caused by endotoxin, with 
myocardial function recovering completely with normal 
EF once the sepsis is treated. It is frequently challenging 
for the clinician caring for a critically ill patient with a 
severe single organ or multiorgan pathological condi-
tion to decide on a plan of action when the patient has elevated cTn values. If and when the patient re-covers from the critical illness, clinical judgment should 
be employed to decide whether, and to what extent, 
further evaluation for CAD or structural heart disease is indicated.
110
23. BIOCHEMICAL APPROACH FOR 
DIAGNOSING MYOCARDIAL INJURY 
AND INFARCTION
cTnI and cTnT are the preferred biomarkers recom-
mended to both rule-in and rule-out myocardial in-
jury, and thus to define MI and each specific subtype 
of MI.12,22,23,31 Detection of a rise and/or fall of cTn val-
ues is essential, and a key early component along with other elements of the clinical evaluation to establish the diagnosis of acute MI. Criteria for determining a 
pathological rise between 2 serial cTn values are assay-
dependent and continue to evolve. An idealized view of troponin kinetics in patients with acute MI is shown 
in Figure 7.
Figure 7. Illustration of early cardiac troponin kinetics in patients after acute myocardial injury including acute myocardial infarction.  
The timing of biomarker release into the circulation is dependent on blood flow and how soon after the onset of symptoms samples are obtained. Thus, the ability 
to consider small changes as diagnostic can be problematic. In addition, many comorbidities increase cTn values and, in particular, hs-cTn values, so that elevations 
can be present at baseline even in those with myocardial infarction who present early after the onset of symptoms. Changes in cTn values or deltas can be used to 
define acute compared with chronic events, and the ability to detect these is indicated in the figure. Increased cTn values can often be detected for days after an 
acute event. cTn indicates cardiac troponin; URL, upper reference limit.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on November 12, 2025

Thygesen et al 2018 ESC/ACC/AHA/WHF Fourth Universal Definition of MI
Circulation. 2018;138:e618–e651. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000617 November 13, 2018
 e635
CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINESIt should be appreciated that because biomarker 
release is substantially dependent on blood flow,111,112 
there is significant variability in the time to peak value 
(velocity), the time when a normal value may become greater than the 99th percentile URL, or when a chang-
ing pattern of values can be observed. The ability to define a changing pattern will also depend on timing. 
For example, around peak values, it may be difficult to observe a changing pattern of values. Similarly, the 
downslope of the time–concentration curve is much 
slower than the upslope. These issues need to be taken into account when defining whether or not a changing 
pattern is present. In addition, it is important to make sure that a given change is greater than can be antici-
pated by variability alone. This is defined for conven-tional cTn assays as a change greater than or equal to 3 
times the standard deviation around the measurement 
of the individual assay at relevant values.
12,22 For hs-cTn 
assays, biological variation also needs to be considered. 
In most studies, conjoint analytical and biological varia-
tion is in the range of 50% to 60%.
For that reason, this percentage has been suggest-
ed for use when initial baseline values are less than or equal to the 99th percentile URL.
23,31,113 However, for 
individuals with an initial value greater than the 99th percentile URL, a lesser degree of change during serial measurements is necessary to achieve improved clini-
cal sensitivity (as compared with individuals with initial 
values less than or equal to the 99th percentile URL). 
Thus, an expert consensus group has recommended se-
rial changes >20% be used in this situation.
22 Absolute 
changes are assay dependent but appear superior to relative percent changes with hs-cTn assays,
114 and in 
some studies this is especially the case when the initial value is increased.
115 The use of a fixed absolute value 
change criteria translates into a smaller percentage or 
relative change as absolute values rise, and therefore 
provides greater sensitivity. The use of a changing pat-
tern is important in allowing clinicians to differentiate 
an acute from a chronic cTn increase above the 99th percentile URL.
113–115 Using criteria less than conjoint 
analytical and biological variation will reduce the clini-cal specificity of hs-cTn assays.
113,116 An imprecision of 
≤10% coefficient of variation (CV) at the 99th per -
centile URL is also mandatory for hs-cTn assays.31 The 
use of non–hs-cTn assays that do not have imprecision (≤10% CV at the 99th percentile URL) makes the de-termination of a significant serial change more difficult 
but does not cause false-positive results. Assays with CVs between 10% and 20% are acceptable for clinical 
use. However, assays with CVs >20% at the 99th per -
centile URL should not be used.
117
If a cTn assay is not available, the best alternative 
is CK-MB measured by a mass assay. As with cTn, an 
increased CK-MB value is defined as a measurement 
above the 99th percentile URL, which is designated as the decision level for the diagnosis of MI. Sex-specific 
CK-MB values should be employed.118
24. ANALYTICAL ISSUES OF CARDIAC 
TROPONINS
The analytical sensitivity (limit of detection [LoD]) of 
cTnI and cTnT assays varies 10-fold.31,119 Because as-
says are not standardized, values from 1 assay cannot be directly compared with those from another assay. Furthermore, values may be different between assay generations
120 and changes can even occur when the 
same assay reagents are measured on different instru-ments.
121 Thus, clinicians must learn about their local 
assay and should look for reliable information, for ex-ample, available on the International Federation of Clin-
ical Chemistry and Laboratory Medicine (IFCC) website 
(http://www.ifcc.org/executive-board-and-council/  
eb-task-forces/task-force-on-clinical-applications-of-cardiac-bio-markers-tf-cb/), when they have questions concerning analytical issues. The current guidelines ac-commodate all assays, whether hs-cTn, contemporary (conventional) cTn, or point of care (POC) cTn. While hs-cTn assays are able to measure relatively low values and document small increases above the 99th percen-tile URL, many contemporary and POC cTn assays may 
not detect small increasing values within the reference 
interval or slightly above the 99th percentile URL, lead-ing to substantial differences in the frequency of events based solely on the cTn assay used. These differences are amplified when multiples of the 99th percentile URL are used. At present, IFCC guidelines support the concept that hs-cTn assays are differentiated from con-temporary or POC cTn assays by their ability to measure cTn values above the assay’s LoD in >50% of healthy individuals.
31,118,119,122 This provides a rough estimate of 
assay sensitivity. It is recommended that values for cTn assays be reported as whole numbers in nanograms per litre to avoid interpretation problems associated with multiple zeros and decimal points that can often re-
sult in confusion.
31 Clinicians should avoid mixing the 
units from contemporary assays with those from hs-
cTn assays. All assays, including cTn assays, have some analytical problems resulting in false-positive and false-
negative results, but these are uncommon (<0.5%).
22 
These problems are less common with hs-cTn assays.23
Conjoint biological and analytical variation of hs-cTn 
assays is in the range of 50% to 60%.123 When values 
are elevated, analytical variation is less and a value of 
20% can be used to determine that values are stable in the proper clinical context. For example, changes may be difficult to observe over short periods of time 
in those who present early after the onset of symptoms 
of acute MI, those who present late and are on the 
downslope of the time–concentration curve, and those 
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on November 12, 2025

Thygesen et al 2018 ESC/ACC/AHA/WHF Fourth Universal Definition of MI
November 13, 2018 Circulation. 2018;138:e618–e651. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000617
 e636
CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINESwho have values near peak where they may be transi-
tioning from a rising to a falling pattern.113,123
25. THE 99TH PERCENTILE UPPER 
REFERENCE LIMIT
The 99th percentile URL is designated as the decision 
level for the presence of myocardial injury and must be 
determined for each specific assay with quality control 
materials used at the URL to validate appropriate assay 
imprecision. The cTn assay 99th percentile URL values 
used in clinical practice and research can be found both 
in manufacturers’ package inserts, in peer-reviewed 
publications, and on the IFCC website.118–120 Clinicians 
should be aware that for all cTn assays, including hs-cTn assays, there is still no expert opinion or consensus 
about specific criteria for how the 99th percentile URL 
should be defined.
124 We endorse IFCC guidelines on 
the technical issues related to hs-cTn assays, including 
how studies should be configured to determine 99th 
percentile URLs.119 The guidelines include the clinical or 
surrogate biomarker screening that may be needed to better define the 99th percentile URL and the statisti-cal methods that can be applied, but do not include a 
requirement for cardiac imaging.
119 Screening of appar -
ently healthy subjects with imaging has been shown to 
lower the observed 99th percentile URL value, but is not a practical standard for the in vitro diagnostic in-
dustry to use.
124,125 Thus, there is the possibility of false-
negative values using the manufacturer’s reported 99th 
percentile URL values. hs-cTn assays demonstrate shifts to higher values for the 99th percentile URL in associa-
tion with comorbidities and age over >60 years.
101,125–127 
However, at present, age-dependent cut-off points are 
not recommended for clinical use. Clinicians should rely 
instead on changing values during serial measurements 
of cTn for the diagnosis of acute myocardial injury, 
including MI. Significantly lower values are observed 
among women compared with men, and therefore 
sex-specific 99th percentile URLs are recommended 
for hs-cTn assays.31,118–120 For some hs-cTn assays, sex-
specific cut-off values have been reported to improve 
diagnostic and prognostic information in patients with 
possible acute MI.128,129 However, there is controversy as 
to whether this approach provides valuable additional 
information for all hs-cTn assays.130
26. OPERATIONALIZING CRITERIA 
FOR MYOCARDIAL INJURY AND INFARCTION
Blood samples for the measurement of cTn should be 
drawn on first assessment (designated as 0 hour) and 
repeated 3 to 6 hours later, or earlier with hs-cTn assays. The sampling interval will impact the clinical cut-off at 
baseline and what is determined to be a pathological rise and/or fall of the biomarker. Sampling beyond 6 
hours may be required if further ischemic episodes oc-
cur, or in high-risk patients. To establish the diagnosis of an acute MI, a rise and/or fall in cTn values with at least 1 value above the 99th percentile URL is required, 
coupled with a high clinical and/or ECG likelihood of 
myocardial ischemia. hs-cTn assays shorten the time to diagnosis in many patients to within 3 hours of onset 
of symptoms, but there are still some patients who may 
rule-in late (at 6 hours).
131 Furthermore, some patients 
with acute myocardial injury presenting late after the onset of acute MI (>12–18 hours) and who are on 
the downslope of the time–concentration curve may 
require longer periods of time for a changing pattern to be detected.
131 In addition, it should be noted that 
with the implementation of cTn and hs-cTn assays, the frequency of unstable angina will decrease and the di-agnosis of NSTEMI will increase.
132,133 The magnitude of 
these changes using hs-cTn assays have been report-
ed in the range of 18% to 30%.134 Assuming proper 
timing of symptoms, acute ischemia should result in a change in hs-cTn; however, there may be patients in 
whom it is difficult to ascertain the timing of symptom onset. Thus, despite typical chest discomfort, these pa-tients may have hs-cTn values that are not elevated. 
Other patients with symptoms suggestive of unstable 
angina may have increased hs-cTn values as a result of structural heart disease with or without acute myocar -
dial ischemia. This latter group may be particularly dif-
ficult to distinguish from patients presenting with late 
NSTEMI with a slow decline in troponin values that can be observed in late presenters.
131 Finally, some patients 
may manifest a changing pattern of troponin values with a magnitude that does not exceed the delta sug-
gested for diagnosis or who fail to manifest a value 
greater than the 99th percentile URL. This is a group of patients that deserves close scrutiny because they may 
be at high risk. The triage of these patients can only be 
accomplished based on clinical evaluation.
Strategies employing either very low levels of hs-
cTn on presentation or the lack of any change and 
persistently normal hs-cTn values over a 1–2 hour 
period after presentation have been advocated to ex-clude acute myocardial injury, and MI as well. A single 
sample rule-out strategy using a very low value (in 
many cases the LoD of the assay) has high sensitiv-ity for myocardial injury and therefore high negative predictive value to exclude MI.
135 This strategy should 
not be used in those who present early (ie, <2 hours after the onset of chest discomfort. Some studies in-
dicate that the single sample approach provides op-
timal sensitivity and negative predictive accuracy in patients otherwise at low risk and those with a nor -
mal ECG.
136–138 However, one concern about very short 
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on November 12, 2025

Thygesen et al 2018 ESC/ACC/AHA/WHF Fourth Universal Definition of MI
Circulation. 2018;138:e618–e651. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000617 November 13, 2018
 e637
CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINESrule-out periods is that the precision of the assays may 
not permit small differences to be distinguished.139–142 
These criteria have not, and should not, be applied to 
patients with hs-cTn elevations.
The clinical specificity and positive predictive value of 
such 1–2 hour sampling approaches for ruling in MI are limited by the substantial proportion of individuals who 
meet the proposed biomarker criteria with diagnoses 
other than MI.
136,141 Thus, the use of a rapid rule-in/-out 
MI protocol does not absolve the clinician from consid-
ering other causes of acute myocardial injury.142 In ad-
dition, considering a broader population of patients—
inclusive of those who present atypically, those with 
end-stage renal disease, and the critically ill—the cut-
off points to be used will likely need to be altered.139 
Such patients have been excluded from the majority of emergency department evaluation studies.
108,136,142
The demonstration of a rising and/or falling pattern 
is needed to distinguish acute injury from chronic con-ditions associated with structural heart disease that can 
have chronic increases of cTn values. For example, pa-
tients with renal failure
99,143,144 or LV hypertrophy145 can 
have significant chronic increases in cTn values. These increases can be marked but do not change acutely 
during serial sampling. However, a falling pattern may take longer to be observed in patients with a high pre-
test risk of MI who present late after symptom onset.
146 
These patients who have cTn values on the downslope of the time–concentration curve have a slow decline in 
values (Figure 7). Thus, detecting a changing pattern 
over short periods of time may be difficult.
117 Depend-
ing on the extent of myocardial injury, cTn values may remain above the 99th percentile URL for a longer pe-
riod of time.
22,23 An increased cTn value above the 99th 
percentile URL, with or without a dynamic change of 
values, or in the absence of clini-cal evidence of isch-
emia, should prompt a search for other diagnoses as-
sociated with myocardial injury, as shown in Table 1.
27. ELECTROCARDIOGRAPHIC 
DETECTION OF MYOCARDIAL 
INFARCTION
The ECG is an integral part of the diagnostic workup 
of patients with suspected MI, and should be acquired and interpreted promptly (ie, target within 10 min-
utes) after first medical contact.
47,147 Prehospital ECGs 
reduce the time to diagnosis and treatment, and can facilitate the triage of STEMI patients to hospitals with 
PCI capability if within the recommended time inter -
val (120 minutes from STEMI diagnosis).
46,148 Acute 
myocardial ischemia is often associated with dynamic changes in ECG waveform and serial ECG acquisition 
can provide critical information, particularly if the ECG 
at initial presentation is nondiagnostic. Recording sev-eral standard ECGs with fixed electrode positions at 
15–30 minute intervals for the initial 1–2 hours, or the use of continuous computer-assisted 12-lead ECG re-
cording (if available) to detect dynamic ECG changes, 
is reasonable for patients with persistent or recurrent symptoms or an initial nondiagnostic ECG.
149 Serial or 
continuous ECG recordings may be helpful in deter -
mining reperfusion or reocclusion status. Reperfusion 
is usually associated with a large and prompt reduction 
in ST-segment elevation.
More profound ST-segment shifts or T wave inver -
sions involving multiple leads/territories are associated with a greater degree of myocardial ischemia, and a worse prognosis. For example, ST-segment depression ≥1 mm in 6 leads, which may be associated with ST-
segment elevation in leads aVR or lead V
1 and hemo-
dynamic compromise, is suggestive evidence of multi-
vessel disease or left main disease. Pathologic Q waves 
increase the prognostic risk. Other ECG signs associ-
ated with acute myocardial ischemia include cardiac ar -
rhythmias, intraventricular bundle branch blocks, atrio-ventricular conduction delays, and loss of precordial 
R wave amplitude, a less specific finding. The ECG by 
itself is often insufficient to diagnose acute myocardial ischemia or infarction, since ST deviation may be ob-served in other conditions, such as acute pericarditis, 
LV hypertrophy (LVH), left bundle branch block (LBBB), 
Brugada syndrome, TTS, and early repolarization pat-terns.
150 A prior ECG is often helpful in distinguishing 
a new from a chronic finding but should not delay the 
decision for treatment.
Prolonged new convex ST-segment elevation, par -
ticularly when associated with reciprocal ST-segment 
depression, usually reflects acute coronary occlu-
sion and results in myocardial injury with necrosis. 
Reciprocal changes can help to differentiate STEMI from pericarditis or early repolarization changes. As in cardiomyopathy, Q waves may also occur due to 
myocardial fibrosis in the absence of CAD. Some of 
the earlier manifestations of myocardial ischemia are typical T wave and ST-segment changes. Increased hyperacute T wave amplitude, with prominent sym-
metrical T waves in at least 2 contiguous leads, is 
an early sign that may precede the elevation of the ST-segment. In general, the development of new Q waves indicates myocardial necrosis, which starts 
minutes/hours after the myocardial insult. Transient 
Q waves may be observed during an episode of acute 
ischemia or (rarely) during acute MI with successful 
reperfusion. Table 2 lists ST-segment–T wave (ST-T) criteria suggestive of acute myocardial ischemia that may or may not lead to MI. The J-point (junction 
between QRS termination and ST-segment onset) is 
used to determine the magnitude of the ST-segment shift with the onset of the QRS serving as the ref-erence point. In patients with a stable baseline, the 
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on November 12, 2025

Thygesen et al 2018 ESC/ACC/AHA/WHF Fourth Universal Definition of MI
November 13, 2018 Circulation. 2018;138:e618–e651. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000617
 e638
CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINESTP segment (isoelectric interval) is a more accurate 
method to assess the magnitude of ST-segment shift, and in distinguishing pericarditis (PTa depression) from acute myocardial ischemia. Tachycardia and baseline shift are common in the acute setting and can make this determination difficult. Therefore, QRS onset is recommended as the reference point for J-point determination (Figure 8).
New, or presumed new, J-point elevation ≥1 mm (1 
mm = 0.1 mV) is required in all leads other than V
2 
and V3 as an ischemic response. In healthy men un-
der age 40, J-point elevation can be as much as 2.5 mm in leads V
2 or V3, but it decreases with increasing 
age. Sex differences require different cut-off points for women, since J-point elevation in healthy women in leads V
2 and V3 is less than in men.5 The criteria in Table 
2 require that the ST shift be present in ≥2 contigu-ous leads. For example, ≥2 mm of ST-elevation in lead V
2 and ≥1 mm in lead V1 would meet the criteria of 
2 abnormal contiguous leads in a man ≥40 years old. However, ≥1 mm and <2 mm of ST-elevation, seen only in leads V
2–V3 in men (or <1.5 mm in women), may 
represent a normal finding.
It should be noted that lesser degrees of ST displace-
ment or T wave inversion than those described in Table 2 can also represent an acute myocardial ischemic re-sponse. In patients with known or high likelihood of CAD, the clinical presentation is critical to enhance the specificity of these findings.
Absence of ST-elevation in the precordial leads, tall, 
prominent, symmetrical T waves in the precordial leads, upsloping ST-segment depression >1 mm at the J-point in the precordial leads, and in most cases ST-segment elevation (>1 mm) in lead aVR or the symmetrical, often deep (>2 mm), T wave inversions in the anterior precor -
dial leads are associated with significant left anterior descending artery (LAD) occlusion.
151–153 ST-elevation in 
lead aVR >1 mm may accompany anterior or inferior STEMI, and is associated with increased 30-day mortal-ity in patients with acute MI.
154 Pulmonary embolism, 
intracranial processes, electrolyte abnormalities, hypo-thermia, or perimyocarditis may also result in ST-T ab-normalities and should be considered in the differential 
diagnosis.
The ECG diagnosis of atrial infarction should be 
suspected in the context of ventricular infarction (par -
ticularly when the right ventricle is involved) if small, 
transient elevations and reciprocal depressions of the 
PR (PTa) segment are noted associated with changes in 
configuration of the P wave.
28. APPLICATION OF SUPPLEMENTAL 
ELECTROCARDIOGRAM LEADS
Supplemental leads, as well as serial ECG recordings, 
should be deployed with a very low threshold in pa-
tients who present with ischemic chest pain and a  nondiagnostic initial ECG.
155,156 ECG evidence of myo-
cardial ischemia in the distribution of a left circumflex 
artery is often overlooked. Isolated ST-segment depres-sion ≥0.5 mm in leads V
1–V3 may indicate left circum-
flex occlusion and can best be captured using posterior leads at the fifth intercostal space (V
7 at the left poste-
rior axillary line, V8 at the left midscapular line, and V9 
at the left paraspinal border). Recording of these leads 
is strongly recommended in patients with high clini-
cal suspicion of acute circumflex occlusion (eg, initial 
ECG nondiagnostic or ST-segment depression in leads 
V1–V3).156 A cut-off point of 0.5 mm ST elevation is rec-
ommended in leads V7–V9; specificity is increased at a 
cut-off point ≥1 mm ST-elevation and this cut-off point should be used in men <40 years old. ST-segment de-
pression in leads V
1–V3 may be suggestive of inferobasal 
myocardial ischemia (previously termed posterior infarc-
tion), especially when the terminal T wave is positive 
(ST-elevation equivalent); however, this is nonspecific.
In patients with inferior and suspected right ventric-
ular infarction, leads aVR or V1 may exhibit ST-segment 
elevation ≥1 mm. The early recording of right precordial 
leads V3R and V4R should be performed, since ST-elevation 
≥0.5 mm (≥1 mm in men <30 years old) provides sup -
portive criteria for the diagnosis.157 Changes in right Figure 8. Electrocardiogram example of ST-segment elevation.  
The initial onset of the Q wave shown by arrow 1 serves as the reference 
point and arrow 2 shows the onset of the ST-segment or J-point. The differ -
ence between the two identifies the magnitude of displacement. Measure-ments of both arrows should be made from the top of the electrocardiogram 
line tracing.Table 2. Electrocardiographic Manifestations Suggestive of Acute 
Myocardial Ischemia (In the Absence of Left Ventricular Hypertrophy 
and Bundle Branch Block)
ST-elevation
  New ST-elevation at the J-point in 2 contiguous leads with the cut-point: 
≥1 mm in all leads other than leads V2–V3 where the following cut-
points apply: ≥2 mm in men ≥40 years; ≥2.5 mm in men <40 years, or ≥1.5 mm in women regardless of age.*
ST-depression and T wave changes
  New horizontal or downsloping ST-depression ≥0.5 mm in 2 contiguous 
leads and/or T inversion >1 mm in 2 contiguous leads with prominent R 
wave or R/S ratio >1.
*When the magnitudes of J-point elevation in leads V
2 and V3 are 
registered from a prior electrocardiogram, new J-point elevation ≥1 mm 
(as compared with the earlier electrocardiogram) should be considered an 
ischemic response. For bundle branch block, see section below.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on November 12, 2025

Thygesen et al 2018 ESC/ACC/AHA/WHF Fourth Universal Definition of MI
Circulation. 2018;138:e618–e651. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000617 November 13, 2018
 e639
CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINESprecordial leads may be transient, and an absence of 
ECG changes in leads V3R and V4R does not exclude 
right ventricular infarction. Myocardial imaging can be helpful in this clinical setting.
29. ELECTROCARDIOGRAPHIC 
DETECTION OF MYOCARDIAL INJURY
It is not possible to initially distinguish ECG manifesta-
tions of acute or chronic myocardial injury from acute 
myocardial ischemia. Rapidly developing dynamic ECG 
changes that temporally match the clinical presentation may be helpful in diagnosing a symptomatic patient 
with elevated cTn values as having acute myocardial 
ischemia resulting in MI. However, ECG abnormalities are also common in patients who have myocardial in-
jury (eg, myocarditis or TTS).
158–160
30. PRIOR OR SILENT/UNRECOGNIZED 
MYOCARDIAL INFARCTION
Q wave criteria associated with MI and an increased 
relative risk of death are illustrated in Table 3, and are contained in Q wave coding algorithms such as the 
Minnesota Code and the WHO MONItoring of trends 
and determinants in CArdiovascular disease (MONICA) code
11,161,162
The specificity of the ECG diagnosis for MI is greatest 
when Q waves occur in several leads or lead group-
ings, or are >0.04 s. When the Q waves are associated 
with ST deviations or T wave changes in the same leads, the likelihood of MI is increased; for example, minor Q waves ≥0.02 s and <0.03 s that are ≥1 mm deep 
are suggestive of prior MI if accompanied by inverted 
T waves in the same lead group. Noninvasive imaging techniques also provide important supportive evidence 
of prior MI. In the absence of nonischemic causes, re-
gional myocardial thinning, scar or reduced wall motion shown by echocardiography, myocardial perfusion scin-
tigraphy (MPS) with single photon emission computed 
tomography (SPECT) or positron emission tomography (PET), or magnetic resonance imaging provide strong evidence for prior MI, particularly when ECG criteria are 
equivocal.Asymptomatic patients who develop new Q wave 
criteria for MI detected during routine ECG follow-up, 
or reveal evidence of MI by cardiac imaging that can-
not be directly attributed to an interim coronary revas-
cularization procedure or an ACS admission, should be termed “silent or unrecognized MI.” In studies 
where serial ECG analysis was applied, silent or un-
recognized Q wave MI accounted for 9% to 37% of 
all non-fatal MI events and was associated with a sig-
nifi-cantly increased mortality risk.
163,164 Improper lead 
placement, QRS abnormalities, or technical errors (eg, 
lead reversal) may result in the appearance of new Q 
waves or QS complexes, as compared with a prior tracing. Thus, the diagnosis of a new silent Q wave MI 
should be confirmed by a repeat ECG recording with 
correct lead placement, focused questioning about potential interim ischemic symptoms, or by an imag-
ing study. Imaging techniques are useful if there is ab-
normal myocardial motion, thickening, or thinning in the region of interest, but the absence of these does not exclude MI.
165
31. CONDITIONS THAT CONFOUND 
THE ELECTROCARDIOGRAPHIC 
DIAGNOSIS OF MYOCARDIAL 
INFARCTION
A QS complex in lead V1 is normal. A Q wave <0.03 s 
and <0.25 of the R wave amplitude in lead III is nor -
mal if the frontal QRS axis is between −30o and 0o. A 
Q wave may also be normal in aVL if the frontal QRS 
axis is between 60o and 90o. Septal Q waves are small, 
nonpathological Q waves <0.03 s and <0.25 of the 
R-wave amplitude in leads I, aVL, aVF, and V4–V6. Pre-
excitation, cardiomyopathy, TTS, cardiac amyloidosis, 
LBBB, left anterior hemiblock, LVH, right ventricular 
hypertrophy, myocarditis, acute cor pulmonale, or 
hyperkalemia may be associated with Q waves or QS complexes in the absence of MI. Clinicians should be 
aware of confounders to the ECG diagnosis of myo-
cardial ischemia, since ST-T wave abnormalities are commonly observed with different pathological cardi-Criteria for Prior or Silent/Unrecognized MI
Any 1 of the following criteria meets the diagnosis 
for prior or silent/unrecognized MI:
•  Pathological Q waves as described in Table 3, with or without symptoms, in the absence of nonischemic causes;
•  Imaging evidence of loss of viable myocardium in a pattern consistent with ischemic etiology;
•  Pathological findings of a prior MI.
Table 3. Electrocardiographic Changes Associated With Prior 
Myocardial Infarction (In the Absence of Left Ventricular Hypertrophy 
and Left Bundle Branch Block)
Any Q wave in leads V2–V3 >0.02 s or QS complex in leads V2–V3.
Q wave ≥0.03 s and ≥1 mm deep or QS complex in leads I, II, aVL, aVF or V
4–V6 in any 2 leads of a contiguous lead grouping (I, aVL; V1–V6; II, III, 
aVF).*
R wave >0.04 s in V1–V2 and R/S >1 with a concordant positive T wave in 
absence of conduction defect.
*The same criteria are used for supplemental leads V7–V9. s indicates seconds.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on November 12, 2025

Thygesen et al 2018 ESC/ACC/AHA/WHF Fourth Universal Definition of MI
November 13, 2018 Circulation. 2018;138:e618–e651. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000617
 e640
CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINESac conditions, such as preexcitation, pericarditis, and 
cardiomyopathy.
32. CONDUCTION DISTURBANCES 
AND PACEMAKERS
The diagnosis of MI is more difficult in the presence of 
conduction disturbances, related in part to ST-T wave changes caused by the conduction disturbance and the fact that the conduction disturbance itself may be heart-rate dependent.
166,167 Comparison to a preadmis-
sion ECG may be helpful in determining if the conduc-
tion defect or ST-T wave changes are new, as long as it 
does not delay time to treatment. Ischemic symptoms, 
and presumed new LBBB or right bundle branch block (RBBB) that is not rate-related, are associated with an adverse prognosis. In patients with LBBB, ST-segment elevation ≥1 mm concordant with the QRS complex in any lead may be an indicator of acute myocardial isch-emia. Similar findings can be useful in detecting ECG evidence for acute myocardial ischemia in patients with right ventricular paced rhythms.
167 Recording an ECG 
trace with the pacemaker temporarily switched off may also be useful in patients who are not pacemaker de-pendent, but careful interpretation of repolarization is needed due to the possible presence of stimulation-induced changes (electrical memory). The ECG diag-nosis of acute myocardial ischemia in patients with biventricular pacing is more difficult. In patients with RBBB, new or presumed new ST-segment elevation ≥1 mm, or ST-segment or T wave abnormalities (excluding leads V
1–V4) (Table 2), may indicate acute myocardial 
ischemia. New, or presumed new, RBBB without associ-ated ST-segment or T wave changes is associated with thrombolysis in myocardial infarction (TIMI) 0–2 flow in as many as 66% of patients (compared with >90% in those with ST-segment or T wave changes).
168
33. ATRIAL FIBRILLATION
In patients with atrial fibrillation and rapid ventricular rate or paroxysmal supraventricular tachycardia, ST-seg-ment depression or T wave inversion may occur in the absence of CAD.
169,170 The causes are not completely 
understood. Cardiac memory, an electrical remodeling phenomenon characterized by marked diffuse T wave inversions following periods of abnormal ventricular activation, which may also be caused by transient rate-related conduction disturbances or pacing, may explain these findings. In some patients, the tachycardia may result in an insufficient increase in coronary flow to match myocardial oxygen demand, resulting in cellu-lar hypoxia and abnormal repolarization.
171,172 For these 
reasons, a patient with new-onset atrial fibrillation, ele-vated baseline cTn concentration, and new ST-segment depression should not automatically be classified as 
type 2 MI without additional information. In this clinical setting, signs of overt ischemic symptoms, the timing of symptoms relative to atrial fibrillation onset, a chang-ing pattern of cTn, and imaging and/or angiographic findings may be helpful in establishing the diagnosis. However, in the absence of evidence for myocardial ischemia, the etiology of the elevated cTn values should be attributed to myocardial injury.
34. IMAGING TECHNIQUES
Noninvasive imaging plays many roles in patients with known or suspected MI, but this section concerns only 
its role in the diagnosis and characterization of myo-
cardial injury and MI. The underlying rationale is that 
regional myocardial hypoperfusion and ischemia lead to a cascade of events including myocardial dysfunc-tion, cell death, and healing by fibrosis. Important im-
aging parameters are therefore myocardial perfusion, 
myocyte viability, myocardial thickness, thickening and 
motion, and the effects of myocyte loss on the kinetics 
of paramagnetic or radio-opaque contrast agents indi-
cating myocardial fibrosis or scar.
Commonly used imaging techniques in acute and 
prior MI are echocardiography, MPS using SPECT or 
PET, CMR, and possibly computed tomography (CT).
173 
There is considerable overlap in their capabilities and each of the techniques can assess myocardial viability, perfusion, and function to a greater or lesser extent. Only the radionuclide techniques provide a direct as-sessment of myocyte viability because of the inherent properties of the tracers used. Other techniques pro-vide indirect assessments of myocardial viability, such as the contractile response to dobutamine by echocar -
diography, or increased extracellular space secondary to 
myocyte loss by CMR or CT.
34.1. Echocardiography
The strength of echocardiography is the combined as-
sessment of cardiac structure and function, in particu-lar myocardial thickness, thickening/thinning, and mo-tion. Regional wall motion abnormalities induced by ischemia can be detected by echocardiography almost immediately after onset when >20% transmural myo-cardial thickness is affected.
174–176 These abnormalities, 
when new and without alternative etiology, support the 
diagnosis of MI when cTn values show a rising and/or 
falling pattern. Echocardiography also allows detection 
of non-coronary cardiac pathologies known to cause chest pain (eg, acute pericarditis, severe aortic stenosis, and hypertrophic cardiomyopathy among others). The 
technique is useful in diagnosing mechanical complica-
tions in patients with MI and hemodynamic compro-
mise (shock), or other potentially fatal entities such as 
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on November 12, 2025

Thygesen et al 2018 ESC/ACC/AHA/WHF Fourth Universal Definition of MI
Circulation. 2018;138:e618–e651. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000617 November 13, 2018
 e641
CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINESacute aortic dissection or massive pulmonary embolism 
where the clinical presentation might be similar to that seen with acute MI.
Intravenous echocardiographic contrast agents can 
improve visualization of the endocardial border, and can be used to assess myocardial perfusion and micro-vascular obstruction. Tissue Doppler and strain imag-ing permit the quantification of global and regional function.
177,178 Intravascular echocardiographic contrast 
agents that are targeted at specific molecular processes have been developed, but these techniques have not 
yet been applied in the setting of MI.
179
34.2. Radionuclide Imaging
Several radionuclide tracers allow viable myocytes to 
be imaged directly, including the SPECT tracers 201TI 
chloride, 99mTc sestamibi, and tetrofosmin, and the 
PET tracers 18F 2-fluorodeoxyglucose and 82Rb.173 A 
strength of the radionuclide techniques is that they 
are the only commonly available methods for assess-ing viability directly, although the relatively low res-olution of the images limits them for detecting the smallest areas of MI. Phantom studies suggest that myocyte loss as little as 4% of the myocardium can be detected, corresponding to 5 to 10 g of muscle.
180 
ECG-gated imaging provides a reliable assessment of myocardial motion, thickening, and global func-tion. Evolving radionuclide techniques relevant to the assessment of MI include imaging of sympathetic innervation using 
123I-labeled meta-iodobenzylgua-
nidine,181 imaging of matrix metalloproteinase activa-
tion in ventricular remodeling,182,183 and the assess-
ment of myocardial metabolism.184
34.3. Cardiac Magnetic Resonance 
Imaging
The high tissue contrast and resolution of CMR pro-
vides an accurate assessment of myocardial structure and function. Although less commonly used in the acute setting, it has similar capabilities to echocardiog-raphy in suspected MI. Paramagnetic contrast agents can be used to assess myocardial perfusion and the in-crease in extracellular space that is associated with the fibrosis of prior MI (detected by LGE-CMR). These tech-niques have been used in the setting of acute MI
185,186 
and localized delay in contrast enhancement is able to detect even small areas of subendocardial MI, thought to be as little as 1 g.
187 CMR also has the ability to 
identify the presence and extent of myocardial edema/inflammation, allowing the distinction of acute versus chronic myocardial injury. The patterns of LGE when reflecting ischemic and nonischemic myocardial injury are shown in Figure 9.The gadolinium-based contrasts wash out slowly 
from myocardium with increased extracellular space 
such as fibrosis, thus enhancing areas of scarring (white arrows). The different patterns of scarring are divided into ischemic and nonischemic. Typically, an ischemic scar/fibrosis (upper panel) extends from the subendocardium to the epicardium (subendocardial, nontransmural scar versus transmural scar). Conversely, a nonischemic fibrosis/scar can be encountered at the epicardium, in the midwall, or at the insertion points of the right ventricle (lower panel).
34.4. Computed Tomographic Coronary 
Angiography
Infarcted myocardium is initially visible as a focal 
area of decreased LV myocardial enhancement, but later imaging shows hyperenhancement as with LGE-CMR.
188 This finding is clinically relevant because con-
trast-enhanced CT may be performed for suspected pulmonary embolism and aortic dissection, conditions with clinical features that overlap with those of acute MI, but the technique is not used routinely. Similarly, CT assessment of myocardial perfusion is technically feasible but not widely applied.
189 CT coronary an-
giography (CTCA) may be used to diagnose CAD in patients with an ACS in the emergency department or chest pain unit, particularly in low- to intermediate-risk patients with normal cTn at presentation.
189–193 
The only randomized trial in these patients that in-cluded both hs-cTn and CTCA found that imaging did not reduce the length of stay in hospital, but it did decrease subsequent outpatient testing and costs.
189 
A diagnosis of MI cannot be established based on a  
CTCA scan alone.
35. APPLYING IMAGING IN ACUTE 
MYOCARDIAL INFARCTION
Imaging techniques can be useful in the diagnosis of 
acute MI because of the ability to detect wall motion abnormalities or loss of viable myocardium in the pres-ence of elevated cardiac biomarker values. Demonstra-tion of new loss of myocardial viability in the absence of nonischemic causes supports the diagnosis of MI. Normal function practically excludes significant MI, but a small MI cannot be ruled out.
194 Thus, imaging tech-
niques are useful for early triage and discharge of pa-
tients with suspected MI. However, if biomarkers have 
been measured at appropriate times and are normal, 
this excludes acute MI and takes precedence over the imaging criteria.
Abnormal regional myocardial motion and thicken-
ing may be caused by acute MI, or by ≥1 of several other conditions including prior infarction, acute isch-
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on November 12, 2025

November 13, 2018 Circulation. 2018;138:e618–e651. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000617 e642
CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINESThygesen et al 2018 ESC/ACC/AHA/WHF Fourth Universal Definition of MI
emia, stunning, or hibernation. Nonischemic condi-
tions such as cardiomyopathy, and inflammatory or infiltrative diseases, can also lead to regional loss of viable myocardium or functional abnormality. There-fore, the positive predictive value of imaging for acute MI is not high unless these conditions can be exclud-ed, and unless a new abnormality is detected or can be presumed to have arisen in the setting of other features of acute MI.
In the setting of acute MI, CMR can also be used 
to assess the presence and extent of myocardium at risk (myocardial edema), myocardial salvage, micro-vascular obstruction, intramyocardial hemorrhage, and infarct size, all markers of myocardial injury that have prognostic value.
190 In patients with possible acute MI but unobstructed coronary arteries, CMR 
can help to diagnose alternative conditions such as 
myocarditis, TTS, embolic infarction, or MI with spon-
taneous recanalization.189
36. APPLYING IMAGING IN LATE 
PRESENTATION OF MYOCARDIAL 
INFARCTION
In the case of late presentation after suspected MI, the 
presence of a regional abnormality of myocardial mo-
tion, thickening, thinning, or scar in the absence of 
a nonischemic cause provides supportive evidence of past MI. The resolution and specificity of CMR for the Figure 9. Postcontrast cardiac magnetic resonance images.  
The gadolinium-based contrasts wash out slowly from myocardium with increased extracellular space such as fibrosis, thus enhancing areas of scarring (white 
arrows). The different patterns of scarring are divided into ischemic and nonischemic. Typically, an ischemic scar/fibrosis (upper panel) extends from the subendo-
cardium to the epicardium (subendocardial, non-transmural scar vs. transmural scar). Conversely, a nonischemic fibrosis/scar can be encountered at the epicardium, in the mid-wall, or at the insertion points of the right ventricle (lower panel).
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on November 12, 2025

Thygesen et al 2018 ESC/ACC/AHA/WHF Fourth Universal Definition of MI
Circulation. 2018;138:e618–e651. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000617 November 13, 2018
 e643
CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINESdetection of myocardial scarring has made this a valu-
able technique. In particular, the ability to distinguish between subendocardial and other patterns of scars 
helps to differentiate between ischemic heart disease 
and other myocardial pathologies. Imaging techniques 
are also useful for risk stratification after a definitive 
diagnosis of MI.
37. REGULATORY PERSPECTIVE 
ON MYOCARDIAL INFARCTION IN CLINICAL TRIALS
In drug and device development programs, MI may be 
an entry criterion or be used as an efficacy end point, commonly as a component of the primary end point, 
as well as a safety end point of interest in drug devel-
opment programs.
195,196 A universal definition of MI is 
of great benefit for clinical studies, since it will allow 
a standardized approach for meaningful interpretation 
and comparison across different trials, or the pooling of results for the detection of safety signals. For the 
harmonization of the MI definition it is important to 
standardize the reporting of MI events by clinical events committees. This would allow a more optimal compari-
son of MI rates among drug and device trials.
One cannot presume that values from 1 cTn assay 
are equivalent to those of another. These differences 
are amplified when multiples of the values are used. 
This could affect results, especially in trials that compare 
strategies such as PCI and CABG. The use of a single as-say and/or a central core laboratory within a trial could 
help to decrease this variability, and might be particu-
larly relevant in decreasing variability in trials of a drug or intervention in which cTn concentration is a principal safety end point. However, the uniform use of a single 
assay is generally not feasible in trials with follow-up 
postdischarge, since recurrent ischemic events may oc-cur in different hospitals using different cTn assays. In 
clinical trials, a standardized approach to establish the 
99th percentile URL for a particular assay should be es-tablished. One approach in large multicenter trials is to 
use the manufacturer’s recommended 99th percentile 
URL for a particular assay to reduce site-to-site variabil-ity in the selection of the MI decision cut-off point.
Multiples for hs-cTn versus conventional cTn could 
have markedly different prognostic implications. The assay types should be reported when possible. Multi-ples of the 99th percentile URL should be indicated and reported, both for those with cardiac procedural myo-
cardial injury and those diagnosed with types 4a and 
5 MI. Cumulative frequency distribution of peak cTn 
measurements for MI end point assessments by treat-
ment group should also be provided. This will facilitate the comparison of trials and meta-analyses.38. SILENT/UNRECOGNIZED 
MYOCARDIAL INFARCTION IN EPIDEMIOLOGICAL STUDIES AND 
QUALITY PROGRAMS
ECG monitoring for unrecognized or silent Q wave MI is 
usually acquired annually in epidemiological studies and clinical trials that assess cardiovascular end points. These 
events are associated with adverse outcomes.
197 There is 
no firm consensus on how frequently to monitor for ECG 
evidence of silent Q wave MI or whether surveillance for silent MI events should be routinely implemented. Serial monitoring of patients who have had a symptomatic Q 
wave MI event revealed Q wave regression in a substan-
tial number of patients.
198 An annual ECG is reasonable 
in clinical trials to monitor for silent Q wave MI events if the study population is expected to have an accelerated 
rate of atherosclerotic events. The review should con-
sider the baseline tracing, interim event ECG tracings, and protocol-mandated annual tracings, along with the 
review of imaging studies if available.
39. INDIVIDUAL AND PUBLIC 
IMPLICATIONS OF THE MYOCARDIAL INFARCTION DEFINITION
Revision of the definition of MI has a number of implica-
tions for individuals, health professionals, and society at large. A tentative or final diagnosis is the basis for ad-
vice about further diagnostic testing, lifestyle changes, 
treatment, and prognosis for the patient. The aggregate of patients with a particular diagnosis is the basis for 
healthcare planning, and policy and resource allocation.
One of the goals of good clinical practice is to reach 
a definitive and specific diagnosis, which is supported 
by current scientific knowledge. The approach to the definition of myocardial injury and MI outlined in this 
document meets this goal. In general, the conceptu-
al meaning of the term myocardial infarction has not changed, although new sensitive methods have been 
developed to diagnose this entity. Thus, the diagnosis 
of an acute MI is a clinical diagnosis based on patient symptoms, ECG changes, and highly sensitive biochem-ical markers, as well as information gleaned from vari-ous imaging techniques.
It should be appreciated that the universal definition 
of MI may be associated with consequences for patients and their families with respect to psychological status, 
life and health insurance, and professional career, as 
well as driving and pilot licenses. The diagnosis is also associated with societal implications with regards to diagnosis-related coding, hospital reimbursement, pub-
lic health statistics, sick leave, and disability attestation. 
In order to meet these challenges, physicians must be adequately informed of the diagnostic criteria. Hence, 
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on November 12, 2025

Thygesen et al 2018 ESC/ACC/AHA/WHF Fourth Universal Definition of MI
November 13, 2018 Circulation. 2018;138:e618–e651. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000617
 e644
CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINESeducational materials will need to be created and treat-
ment guidelines must be appropriately adapted.
40. GLOBAL PERSPECTIVES OF 
THE DEFINITION OF MYOCARDIAL INFARCTION
Cardiovascular disease is a global health problem and 
prevalence is increasing in the developing world. Un-
derstanding the burden and effects of CAD in popula-
tions is of critical importance. Changing clinical defini-
tions, criteria, and biomarkers add challenges to our 
understanding and ability to improve the health of 
the public. For clinicians, the definition of MI has im-
portant and immediate therapeutic implications. For epidemiologists, the data are often retrospective, so 
consistent case definitions are critical for comparisons 
and trend analysis. The standards described in this 
report are suitable for epidemiology studies and for 
international classification of diseases.
199 However, to 
analyze trends over time, it is important to have con-sistent definitions and to quantify adjustments when 
biomarkers or other diagnostic methods change,
200 
considering that the advent of cTn has dramatically increased the number of diagnosable MIs for epide-
miologists.
11,201
In countries with limited economic resources, cardiac 
biomarkers and imaging techniques may not be avail-
able except in a few centers and even the option of 
ECG recordings may be lacking. The WHO recommends 
the use of the ESC/ACC/AHA/WHF Universal Defini-
tion of MI in countries without resource constraints, 
but recommends more flexible standards in resource-
constrained locations. Thus, when the only information available is the clinical history and ECG, and when data 
on cardiac biomarkers are not available or incomplete, 
the diagnosis of MI can be confirmed by the develop-
ment of pathological Q waves.
11
41. USING THE UNIVERSAL DEFINITION 
OF MYOCARDIAL INFARCTION IN THE HEALTHCARE SYSTEM
Arriving at a diagnosis of MI using the criteria set forth 
in this document requires the integration of clinical 
findings, patterns on the ECG, laboratory data, ob-
servations from imaging procedures, and on occasion 
pathological findings, all viewed in the context of the 
time horizon over which the suspected event unfolds. 
Contemporary healthcare systems are increasingly us-
ing electronic medical records where medical informa-tion is entered, curated, and available for retrieval at 
a later date. This evolution offers the advantages of a 
modern electronic database that is useful for a variety of purposes, including scientific discovery and quality 
improvement in clinical care, but carries with it the chal-
lenges of sifting through variable locations and formats 
where key data elements for confirming a diagnosis 
of MI are located. Also, use of the electronic medical 
record as an epidemiological and research tool of the future is likely to require efforts to verify the accuracy of an acute MI diagnosis, rather than accepting the coded 
diagnoses used for administrative and billing purposes. 
Such an effort to create a computable phenotype of MI (further categorized as types 1–5 MI) will require in-put from informaticians and experts in implementation science to translate the recommendations from this 
Universal Definition of MI into the routine practice of 
healthcare delivery and documentation.
Given the evolution of biomarker assays used to 
support the diagnosis of MI, it is important that a con-sistent approach be used in the construction of the computable phenotype of MI so as to reliably make 
comparisons across institutions and track epidemiologi-
cal trends. Ideally, the information provided should in-clude the assay used to make the diagnosis of MI, the 99th percentile of the URL, and the full sequence of 
values obtained to discern a rise and fall in biomarker 
levels.
196
ARTICLE INFORMATION
Disclaimer. The ESC/ACC/AHA/WHF Expert Consensus Document represents 
the views of the ESC, ACC, AHA, and WHF and was produced after careful 
consideration of the scientific and medical knowledge and the evidence avail-able at the time of their publication. The ESC, ACC, AHA, and WHF are not responsible in the event of any contradiction, discrepancy, and/or ambiguity 
between the ESC/ACC/AHA/WHF Expert Consensus Document and any other 
official recommendations or Expert Consensus Document issued by the relevant public health authorities, in particular in relation to good use of healthcare or 
therapeutic strategies. Health professionals are encouraged to take the ESC/ 
ACC/AHA/WHF Expert Consensus Document fully into account when exercis-ing their clinical judgment, as well as in the determination and the implementa-tion of preventive, diagnostic, or therapeutic medical strategies; however, the 
ESC/ACC/AHA/WHF Expert Consensus Document does not override, in any 
way whatsoever, the individual responsibility of health professionals to make appropriate and accurate decisions in consideration of each patient’s health condition and in consultation with that patient and, where appropriate and/
or necessary, the patient’s caregiver. Nor does the ESC/ACC/AHA/WHF Expert 
Consensus Document exempt health professionals from taking into full and careful consideration the relevant official updated recommendations or Expert 
Consensus Documents issued by the competent public health authorities, in 
order to manage each patient’s case in light of the scientifically accepted data 
pursuant to their respective ethical and professional obligations. It is also the 
health professional’s responsibility to verify the applicable rules and regulations relating to drugs and medical devices at the time of prescription.
This article has been copublished in the European Heart Journal, the Journal 
of the American College of Cardiology, and Global Heart.
Copies: This document is available on the websites of the European Society 
of Cardiology (www.escardio.org.), American College of Cardiology (www.acc.org), American Heart Association (professional.heart.org), and the World Heart Federation (www.world-heart-federation.org). A copy of the document is also available at https://professional.heart.org/statements by selecting the “Guide-lines & Statements” button. To purchase additional reprints, call 843-216-2533 or e-mail kelle.ramsay@wolterskluwer.com.
The expert peer review of AHA-commissioned documents (eg, scientific 
statements, clinical practice guidelines, systematic reviews) is conducted by the 
AHA Office of Science Operations. For more on AHA statements and guide-
lines development, visit https://professional.heart.org/statements. Select the 
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on November 12, 2025

Thygesen et al 2018 ESC/ACC/AHA/WHF Fourth Universal Definition of MI
Circulation. 2018;138:e618–e651. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000617 November 13, 2018
 e645
CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINES“Guidelines & Statements” drop-down menu near the top of the webpage, 
then click “Publication Development.”
Permissions: The content of this ESC/ACC/AHA/WHF Expert Consensus 
Document has been published for personal and educational use only. No com-mercial use is authorized. No part of the ESC/ACC/AHA/WHF Expert Consen-
sus Document may be translated or reproduced in any form without written 
permission from the ESC or ACC or AHA or WHF. Multiple copies, modifica-tion, alteration, enhancement, and/or distribution of this document are not 
permitted without the express permission of the American Heart Association. 
Instructions for obtaining permission are located at https://www.heart.org/permissions. A link to the “Copyright Permissions Request Form” appears in 
the second paragraph (https://www.heart.org/en/about-us/statements-and-
policies/copyright-request-form).
Acknowledgment
We are indebted to Karen A. Hicks for valuable advice.
Document Reviewers
David Hasdai (CPG Review Coordinator) (Israel), Victor Aboyans (France), 
Stephan Achenbach (Germany), Stefan Agewall (Norway), Thomas Alexander 
(India), Alvaro Avezum (Brazil), Emanuele Barbato (Italy), Jean-Pierre Bassand (France), Eric Bates (USA), John A. Bittl (USA), Güenter Breithardt (Germany), 
Héctor Bueno (Spain), Raffaele Bugiardini (Italy), Mauricio G. Cohen (USA), 
George Dangas (USA), James A. de Lemos (USA), Victoria Delgado (Neth-erlands), Gerasimos Filippatos (Greece), Edward Fry (USA), Christopher B. 
Granger (USA), Sigrun Halvorsen (Norway), Mark A. Hlatky (USA), Borja Ibanez 
(Spain), Stefan James (Sweden), Adnan Kastrati (Germany), Christophe Leclercq (France), Kenneth W. Mahaffey (USA), Laxmi Mehta (USA), Christian Müller (Switzerland), Carlo Patrono (Italy), Massimo Francesco Piepoli (Italy), Daniel 
Piñeiro (Argentina), Marco Roffi (Switzerland), Andrea Rubboli (Italy), Marc Ruel 
(Canada), Samin Sharma (USA), Iain A. Simpson (UK), Michael Tendera (Poland), Marco Valgimigli (Switzerland), Allard C. van der Wal (Netherlands), Stephan 
Windecker (Switzerland).
APPENDIX
Approved by the ESC Committee for Practice Guidelines (CPG) on behalf of the 
ESC Board 2016–2018.
ESC National Cardiac Societies actively involved in the review process of the 
Fourth Universal Definition of Myocardial Infarction:
Algeria: Algerian Society of Cardiology, Mohamed Chettibi; Armenia: 
Armenian Cardiologists Association, Hamlet Hayrapetyan; Austria: Austrian Society of Cardiology, Franz Xaver Roithinger; Azerbaijan: Azerbaijan Society of Cardiology, Farid Aliyev; Belarus: Belorussian Scientific Society of Cardiolo-
gists, Volha Sujayeva; Belgium: Belgian Society of Cardiology, Marc J. Claeys; 
Bosnia and Herzegovina: Association of Cardiologists of Bosnia and Herze-govina, Elnur Smajić ; Czech Republic: Czech Society of Cardiology, Petr Kala; 
Denmark: Danish Society of Cardiology, Kasper Karmak Iversen; Egypt: Egyp-tian Society of Cardiology, Ehab El Hefny; Estonia: Estonian Society of Cardi-ology, Toomas Marandi; Finland: Finnish Cardiac Society, Pekka Porela; The 
Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia: Macedonian FYR Society of Cardiol-
ogy, Slobodan Antov; France: French Society of Cardiology, Martine Gilard; Germany: German Cardiac Society, Stefan Blankenberg; Greece: Hellenic So-
ciety of Cardiology, Periklis Davlouros; Iceland: Icelandic Society of Cardiology, 
Thorarinn Gudnason; Israel: Israel Heart Society, Ronny Alcalai; Italy: Italian Federation of Cardiology, Furio Colivicchi; Kosovo: Kosovo Society of Cardiol-
ogy, Shpend Elezi; Kyrgyzstan: Kyrgyz Society of Cardiology, Gulmira Baitova, 
Latvia: Latvian Society of Cardiology, Ilja Zakke; Lithuania: Lithuanian Society of Cardiology, Olivija Gustiene; Luxembourg: Luxembourg Society of Cardi-
ology, Jean Beissel; Malta: Maltese Cardiac Society, Philip Dingli; Moldova: 
Moldavian Society of Cardiology, Aurel Grosu; The Netherlands: Netherlands Society of Cardiology, Peter Damman; Norway: Norwegian Society of Cardiol-
ogy, Vibeke Juliebø; Poland: Polish Cardiac Society, Jacek Legutko; Portugal: 
Portuguese Society of Cardiology, Joäo Morais; Romania: Romanian Society of Cardiology, Gabriel Tatu-Chitoiu; Russian Federation: Russian Society of 
Cardiology, Alexey Yakovlev; San Marino: San Marino Society of Cardiology, 
Marco Zavatta; Serbia: Cardiology Society of Serbia, Milan Nedeljkovic; Slove-nia: Slovenian Society of Cardiology, Peter Radsel; Spain: Spanish Society of 
Cardiology, Alessandro Sionis; Sweden: Swedish Society of Cardiology, Tomas 
Jemberg; Switzerland: Swiss Society of Cardiology, Christian Müller; Tunisia: Tunisian Society of Cardiology and Cardio-Vascular Surgery, Leila Abid; Tur -key: Turkish Society of Cardiology, Adnan Abaci; Ukraine: Ukrainian Associa-
tion of Cardiology, Alexandr Parkhomenko; United Kingdom: British Cardio-vascular Society, Simon Corbett.
Approved by the ACC Clinical Policy Approval Committee.Approved by the AHA Science Advisory and Coordinating Committee.Approved by the WHF Board.
REFERENCES
 1. Hammer A. Ein Fall von thrombotischem Verschlusse einer der Kranzarter -
ien des Herzens. Wien Med Wschr. 1878;28:97–102.
 2. Obraztzow VP , Straschesko ND. Zur Kenntnis der Thrombose der Koro-nararterien des Herzens. Z Klin Med. 1910;71:116–132.
 3. Herrick JB. Clinical features of sudden obstruction of the coronary arteries. 
JAMA. 1912;59:2015–2022.
 4. Friedberg CK, Horn H. Acute myocardial infarction not due to coronary 
artery occlusion. JAMA. 1939;112:1675–1679.
 5. World Health Organization. Working Group on the Establishment of Isch-emic Heart Disease Registers. Report of the Fifth Working Group, Copen-hagen. In: Report No. Eur 8201 (5). Geneva, Switzerland: World Health Organization; 1971.
 6. Report of the Joint International Society and Federation of Cardiology/World Health Organization task force on standardization of clinical no-menclature. Nomenclature and criteria for diagnosis of ischemic heart disease. Circulation. 1979;59:607–609.
 7. Tunstall-Pedoe H, Kuulasmaa K, Amouyel P , Arveiler D, Rajakangas AM, 
Pajak A. Myocardial infarction and coronary deaths in the World Health 
Organization MONICA Project. Registration procedures, event rates, and case-fatality rates in 38 populations from 21 countries in four continents. Circulation. 1994;90:583–612.
 8. Luepker RV, Apple FS, Christenson RH, Crow RS, Fortmann SP , Goff D, Goldberg RJ, Hand MM, Jaffe AS, Julian DG, Levy D, Manolio T, Men-dis S, Mensah G, Pajak A, Prineas RJ, Reddy KS, Roger VL, Rosamond WD, Shahar E, Sharrett AR, Sorlie P , Tunstall-Pedoe H. Case definitions for acute coronary heart disease in epidemiology and clinical research stud-ies: a statement from the AHA Council on Epidemiology and Prevention; 
AHA Statistics Committee; World Heart Federation Council on Epidemiol-
ogy and Prevention; the European Society of Cardiology Working Group on Epidemiology and Prevention; Centers for Disease Control and Pre-vention; and the National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute. Circulation. 2003;108:2543–2549.
 9. The Joint European Society of Cardiology/American College of Cardiology Committee. Myocardial infarction redefined—a consensus document of the Joint European Society of Cardiology/American College of Cardiol-ogy Committee for the Redefinition of Myocardial Infarction. Eur Heart J. 2000;21:1502–1513; J Am Coll Cardiol. 2000;36:959–969.
 10. Thygesen K, Alpert JS, White HD; Joint ESC/ACC/AHA/WHF Task Force 
for the Redefinition of Myocardial Infarction. Universal definition of 
myocardial infarction. Eur Heart J. 2007;28:2525–2538; Circulation. 2007;116:2634–2653; J Am Coll Cardiol. 2007;50:2173–2195.
 11. Mendis S, Thygesen K, Kuulasmaa K, Giampaoli S, Mähönen M, Ngu Blackett K, Lisheng L; Writing group on behalf of the participating experts 
of the WHO consultation for revision of WHO definition of myocardial 
infarction. World Health Organization definition of myocardial infarction: 2008-09 revision. Int J Epidemiol. 2011;40:139–146.
 12. Thygesen K, Alpert JS, Jaffe AS, Simoons ML, Chaitman BR, White HD; Writing Group on the Joint ESC/ACC/AHA/WHF Task Force for the Uni-
versal Definition of Myocardial Infarction. Third universal definition of 
myocardial infarction. Eur Heart J. 2012;33:2551–2567; Circulation. 2012;126:2020–2035; J Am Coll Cardiol. 2012;60:1581–1598.
 13. Sarkisian L, Saaby L, Poulsen TS, Gerke O, Jangaard N, Hosbond S, Diederichsen ACP , Thygesen K, Mickley H. Clinical characteristics and 
outcomes of patients with myocardial infarction, myocardial injury, and 
nonelevated troponins. Am J Med. 2016;129:446e.5–446e.21.
 14. Sarkisian L, Saaby L, Poulsen TS, Gerke O, Hosbond S, Jangaard N, Die-derichsen ACP , Thygesen K, Mickley H. Prognostic impact of myocardial injury related to various cardiac and noncardiac conditions. Am J Med. 2016;129:506–514.
 15. Ooi DS, Isotalo PA, Veinot JP . Correlation of antemortem serum creatine kinase, creatine kinase-MB, troponin I, and troponin T with cardiac pathol-
ogy. Clin Chem. 2000;46:338–344.
 16. Jennings RB, Ganote CE. Structural changes in myocardium during acute 
ischemia. Circ Res. 1974;35:156–172.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on November 12, 2025

Thygesen et al 2018 ESC/ACC/AHA/WHF Fourth Universal Definition of MI
November 13, 2018 Circulation. 2018;138:e618–e651. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000617
 e646
CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINES 17. Virmani R, Forman MB, Kolodgie FD. Myocardial reperfusion injury. Histo-
pathological effects of perfluorochemical. Circulation. 1990;81:IV57–IV68.
 18. Reimer KA, Jennings RB, Tatum AH. Pathobiology of acute myocardial ischemia: metabolic, functional and ultrastructural studies. Am J Cardiol. 
1983;52:72A–81A.
 19. Ibáñez B, Heusch G, Ovize M, Van de Werf F. Evolving therapies for myocardial ischemia/reperfusion injury. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2015;65: 
1454–1471.
 20. Montecucco F, Carbone F, Schindler TH. Pathophysiology of ST-segment 
elevation myocardial infarction: novel mechanisms and treatments. Eur 
Heart J. 2016;37:1268–1283.
 21. Thygesen K, Mair J, Katus H, Plebani M, Venge P , Collinson P , Lindahl B, 
Giannitsis E, Hasin Y, Galvani M, Tubaro M, Alpert JS, Biasucci LM, Koenig 
W, Mueller CH, Huber K, Hamm C, Jaffe AS; The Study Group on Bio-
markers in Cardiology of the ESC Working Group on Acute Cardiac Care. Recommendations for the use of cardiac troponin measurement in acute cardiac care. Eur Heart J. 2010;31:2197–2204.
 22. Thygesen K, Mair J, Giannitsis E, Mueller C, Lindahl B, Blankenberg S, 
Huber K, Plebani M, Biasucci LM. Tubaro M, Collinson P , Venge P , Hasin Y, 
Galvani M, Koenig W, Hamm C, Alpert JS, Katus H, Jaffe AS; Study Group on Biomarkers in Cardiology of the ESC Working Group on Acute Cardiac Care. How to use high-sensitivity cardiac troponins in acute cardiac care. Eur Heart J. 2012;33:2252–2257.
 23. Rittoo D, Jones A, Lecky B, Neithercut D. Elevation of cardiac troponin T, but not cardiac troponin I, in patients with neuromuscular diseases: implications for the diagnosis of myocardial infarction. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2014;63:2411–2420.
 24. Jaffe AS, Vasile VC, Milone M, Saenger AK, Olson KN, Apple FS. Diseased skeletal muscle: a noncardiac source of increased circulating concentra-tions of cardiac troponin T. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2011;58:1819–1824.
 25. Wens SCA, Schaaf GJ, Michels M, Kruijshaar ME, van Gestel TJM, In ‘t 
Groen S, Pijnenburg J, Dekkers DHW, Demmers JAA, Verdijk LB, Brusse 
E, van Schaik RHN, van der Ploeg AT, van Doorn PA, Pijnappel WWMP . 
Elevated plasma cardiac troponin T levels caused by skeletal muscle dam-
age in Pompe disease. Circ Cardiovasc Genet. 2016;9:6–13.
 26. Mair J, Lindahl B, Müller C, Giannitsis E, Huber K, Möckel M, Plebani M, 
Thygesen K, Jaffe AS. What to do when you question cardiac troponin 
values. Eur Heart J Acute Cardiovasc Care. 2018;7:577–586.
 27. Mair J, Lindahl B, Hammarsten O, Müller C, Giannitsis E, Huber K, Möckel M, Plebani M, Thygesen K, Jaffe AS; European Society of Cardiology (ESC) Study Group on Biomarkers in Cardiology of the Acute Cardiovascular Care Association (ACCA). How is cardiac troponin released from injured myocar -
dium? Eur Heart J Acute Cardiovasc Care. 2018;7:553–560.
 28. Vestergaard KR, Jespersen CB, Arnadottir A, Soletormos G, Schou M, Steffensen R, Goetze JP , Kjoller E, Iversen KK. Prevalence and significance of troponin elevations in patients without acute coronary disease. Int J Cardiol. 2016;222:819–825.
 29. Schmid J, Liesinger L, Birner-Gruenberger R, Stojakovic T, Scharnagl H, Dieplinger B, Asslaber M, Radl R, Beer M, Polacin M, Mair J, Szolar D, Berghold A, Quasthoff S, Binder JS. Rainer PP . Elevated cardiac troponin T 
in skeletal myopathies. J Am Cardiol Coll. 2018;71:1540–1549.
 30. Apple FS, Jaffe AS, Collinson P , Mockel M, Ordonez-Llanos J, Lindahl B, 
Hollander J, Plebani M, Than M, Chan MH; on behalf of the International 
Federation of Clinical Chemistry (IFCC) Task Force on Clinical Applications 
of Cardiac Bio-Markers. IFCC educational materials on selected analytical 
and clinical applications of high sensitivity cardiac troponin assays. Clin 
Biochem. 2015;48:201–203.
 31. Goodman SG, Steg PG, Eagle KA, Fox KA, López-Sendón J, Montalescot 
G, Budaj A, Kennelly BM, Gore JM, Allegrone J, Granger CB, Gurfinkel EP; GRACE Investigators. The diagnostic and prognostic impact of the redefi-nition of acute myocardial infarction: lessons from the Global Registry of Acute Coronary Events (GRACE). Am Heart J. 2006;151:654–660.
 32. Weil BR, Suzuki G, Young RF, Iyer V, Canty JM Jr. Troponin release and re-versible left ventricular dysfunction following transient pressure overload: stress-induced myocardial stunning. J Am Cardiol Coll. 2018;71:2906–2916.
 33. Turer AT, Addo TA, Martin JL, Sabatine MS, Lewis GD, Gerszten RE, Keeley EC, Cigarroa JE, Lange RA, Hillis LD, de Lemos JA. Myocardial ischemia induced by rapid atrial pacing causes troponin T release detectable by a 
highly sensitive assay: insights from a coronary sinus sampling study. J Am 
Coll Cardiol. 2011;57:2398–2405.
 34. Siriwardena M, Campbell V, Richards AM, Pemberton CJ. Cardiac bio-
marker responses to dobutamine stress echocardiography in healthy 
volunteers and patients with coronary artery disease. Clin Chem.  
2012;58:1492–1494. 35. White HD. Pathobiology of troponin elevations: do elevations occur with 
myocardial ischemia as well as necrosis? J Am Coll Cardiol. 2011;57:2406–2408.
 36. Jaffe AS, Wu AH. Troponin release—reversible or irreversible injury? Should we care? Clin Chem. 2012;58:148–150.
 37. Eggers KM, Lindahl B. Application of cardiac troponin in cardiovascular diseases other than acute coronary syndrome. Clin Chem. 2017;63:223–
235.
 38. Giannitsis E, Katus HA. Cardiac troponin level elevations not related to 
acute coronary syndromes. Nat Rev Cardiol. 2013;10:623–634.
 39. Agewall S, Giannitsis E, Jernberg T, Katus H. Troponin elevation in coro-
nary vs. non-coronary disease. Eur Heart J. 2011;32:404–411.
 40. Kelley WE, Januzzi JL, Christenson RH. Increases of cardiac troponin in 
conditions other than acute coronary syndrome and heart failure. Clin 
Chem. 2009;55:2098–2112.
 41. Jeremias A, Gibson CM. Alternative causes for elevated cardiac troponin 
levels when acute coronary syndromes are excluded. Ann Intern Med. 
2005;142:786–791.
 42. Weil BR, Young RF, Shen X, Suzuki G, Qu J, Malhotra S, Canty JM Jr. Brief myocardial ischemia produces cardiac troponin I release and focal myocyte apoptosis in the absence of pathological infarction in swine. JACC Basic Transl Sci. 2017;2:105–114.
 43. Braunwald E, Morrow DA. Unstable angina: is it time for a requiem? Cir -
culation. 2013;127:2452–2457.
 44. Bentzon JF, Otsuka F, Virmani R, Falk E. Mechanisms of plaque formation and rupture. Circ Res. 2014;114:1852–1866.
 45. Falk E, Nakano M, Bentzon JF, Finn AV, Virmani R. Update on acute coronary syndromes: the pathologists’ view. Eur Heart J. 2013;34:  
719–728.
 46. Ibanez B, James S, Agewall S, Antunes MJ, Bucciarelli-Ducci C, Bueno H, 
Caforio ALP , Crea F, Goudevenos JA, Halvorsen S, Hindricks G, Kastrati 
A, Lenzen MJ, Prescott E, Roffi M, Valgimigli M, Varenhorst C, Vranckx 
P , Widimský P . 2017 ESC Guidelines for the management of acute myo-
cardial infarction in patients presenting with ST-segment elevation. Eur 
Heart J. 2018;39:119–177.
 47. Roffi M, Patrono C, Collet JP , Mueller C, Valgimigli M, Andreotti F, Bax JJ, Borger MA, Brotons C, Chew DP , Gencer B, Hasenfuss G, Kjeldsen K, Lan-
cellotti P , Landmesser U, da Mehilli J, Mukherjee D, Storey RF, Windecker S. 2015 ESC Guidelines for the management of acute coronary syndromes in patients presenting without persistent ST-segment elevation. Eur Heart J.  
2016;37:267–315.
 48. Saaby L, Poulsen TS, Hosbond S, Larsen TB, Pyndt Diederichsen AC, Hallas J, Thygesen K, Mickley H. Classification of myocardial infarction: frequency and features of type 2 myocardial infarction. Am J Med. 2013;126:789–797.
 49. Cediel G, Gonzalez-del-Hoyo M, Carrasquer A, Sanchez R, Boqué C, Bardají A. Outcomes with type 2 myocardial infarction compared with non-ischemic myocardial injury. Heart. 2017;103:616–622.
 50. Baron T, Hambraeus K, Sundström J, Erlinge D, Jernberg T, Lindahl B; TOTAL-AMI study group. Type 2 myocardial infarction in clinical practice. 
Heart. 2015;101:101–106.
 51. Shah AS, McAllister DA, Mills R, Lee KK, Churchhouse AM, Fleming KM, 
Layden E, Anand A, Fersia O, Joshi NV, Walker S, Jaffe AS, Fox KA, Newby 
DE, Mills NL. Sensitive troponin assay and the classification of myocardial 
infarction. Am J Med. 2015;128:493–501.
 52. Gupta S, Vaidya SR, Arora S, Bahekar A, Devarapally SR. Type 2 versus 
type 1 myocardial infarction: a comparison of clinical characteristics and 
outcomes with a meta-analysis of observational studies. Cardiovasc Diagn Ther. 2017;7:348–358.
 53. Sandoval Y, Thygesen K. Myocardial infarction type 2 and myocardial in-jury. Clin Chem. 2017;63:101–107.
 54. Saaby L, Poulsen TS, Diederichsen ACP , Hosbond S, Larsen TB, Schmidt H, Gerke O, Hallas J, Thygesen K, Mickley H. Mortality rate in type 2 myo-cardial infarction: observations from an unselected hospital cohort. Am J Med. 2014;127:295–302.
 55. Lambrecht S, Sarkisian L, Saaby L, Poulsen TS, Gerke O, Hosbond S, Died-erichsen ACP , Thygesen K, Mickley H. Different causes of death in patients with myocardial infarction type 1, type 2 and myocardial injury. Am J Med. 
2018;131:548–554.
 56. Chapman AR, Shah ASV, Lee KK, Anand A, Francis O, Adamson P , McAl-
lister DA, Strachan F, Newby DE, Mills NL. Long term outcomes in pa-
tients with type 2 myocardial infarction and myocardial injury. Circulation. 
2018;137:1236–1245.
 57. Neumann JT, Sörensen NA, Rübsamen N, Ojeda F, Renne T, Qaderi V, Tel-
trop E, Kramer S, Quantius L, Zeller T, Karakas M, Blankenberg S, Wester -
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on November 12, 2025

Thygesen et al 2018 ESC/ACC/AHA/WHF Fourth Universal Definition of MI
Circulation. 2018;138:e618–e651. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000617 November 13, 2018
 e647
CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINESmann D. Discrimination of patients with type 2 myocardial infarction. Eur 
Heart J. 2017;38:3514–3520.
 58. Saw J, Mancini GB, Humphries KH. Contemporary review on spontaneous coronary artery dissection. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2016;68:297–312.
 59. Januzzi JL, Sandoval Y. The many faces of type 2 myocardial infarction.  
J Am Cardiol Coll. 2017;70:1569–1572.
 60. Jangaard N, Sarkisian L, Saaby L, Mikkelsen S, Lassen AM, Marcussen N, 
Thomsen JL, Diederichsen A, Thygesen K, Mickley H. Incidence, frequency 
and clinical characteristics of type 3 myocardial infarction in clinical prac-
tice. Am J Med. 2017;130:862.e9–862.e14.
 61. Selvanayagam JB, Petersen SE, Francis JM, Robson MD, Kardos A, Neu-
bauer S, Taggart DP . Effects of off-pump versus on-pump coronary sur -
gery on reversible and irreversible myocardial injury: a randomized trial 
using cardiovascular magnetic resonance imaging and biochemical mark-
ers. Circulation. 2004;109:345–350.
 62. Selvanayagam JB, Porto I, Channon K, Petersen SE, Francis JM, Neubauer 
S, Banning AP . Troponin elevation after percutaneous coronary inter -
vention directly represents the extent of irreversible myocardial injury: 
insights from cardiovascular magnetic resonance imaging. Circulation. 
2005;111:1027–1032.
 63. Rahimi K, Banning AP , Cheng AS, Pegg TJ, Karamitsos TD, Channon KM, Darby S, Taggart DP , Neubauer S, Selvanayagam JB. Prognostic value of 
coronary revascularisation-related myocardial injury: a cardiac magnetic resonance imaging study. Heart. 2009;95:1937–1943.
 64. Tricoci P . Consensus or controversy?: evolution of criteria for myocar -
dial infarction after percutaneous coronary intervention. Clin Chem. 
2017;63:82–90.
 65. Ndrepepa G, Colleran R, Braun S, Cassese S, Hieber J, Fusaro M, Kufner 
S, Ott I, Byrne RA, Husser O, Hengstenberg C, Laugwitz KL, Schun-
kert H, Kastrati A. High-sensitivity troponin T and mortality after elec-
tive percutaneous coronary intervention. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2016;68:  
2259–2268.
 66. Zeitouni M, Silvain J, Guedeney P , Kerneis M, Yan Y, Overtchouk P , Barthe-lemy O, Hauguel-Moreau M, Choussat R, Helft G, Le Feuvre C, Collet JP , Montalescot G; ACTION Study Group. Periprocedural myocardial infarc-
tion and injury in elective coronary stenting. Eur Heart J. 2018;39:1100–
1109.
 67. Thygesen K, Jaffe AS. The prognostic impact of periprocedural myocardial infarction and injury. Eur Heart J. 2018;39:1110–1112.
 68. Garcia-Garcia HM, McFadden EP , Farb A, Mehran R, Stone GW, Spertus 
J, Onuma Y, Morel MA, van Es GA, Zuckerman B, Fearon WF, Taggart D, 
Kappetein AP , Krucoff MW, Vranckx P , Windecker S, Cutlip D, Serruys 
PW. Standardized endpoint definitions for coronary intervention trials: 
The Academic Research Consortium-2 Consensus Document. Eur Heart J. 2018;39:2192–2207; Circulation. 2018;137:2635–2650.
 69. Pegg TJ, Maunsell Z, Karamitsos TD, Taylor RP , James T, Francis JM, Tag-
gart DP , White H, Neubauer S, Selvanayagam JB. Utility of cardiac bio-
markers for the diagnosis of type V myocardial infarction after coronary 
artery bypass grafting: insights from serial cardiac MRI. Heart. 2011;97: 
810–816.
 70. Jørgensen PH, Nybo M, Jensen MK, Mortensen PE, Poulsen TS, Died-
erichsen ACP , Mickley H. Optimal cut-off value for cardiac troponin I in 
ruling out type 5 myocardial infarction. Interact Cardiovasc Thorac Surg. 
2014;18:544–550.
 71. Wang TK, Stewart RA, Ramanathan T, Kang N, Gamble G, White HD. Diagno-
sis of MI after CABG with high-sensitivity troponin T and new ECG or echo-
cardiogram changes: relationship with mortality and validation of the univer -
sal definition of MI. Eur Heart J Acute Cardiovasc Care. 2013;2:323–333.
 72. Thielmann M, Sharma V, Al-Attar N, Bulluck H, Bisleri G, Bunge JJH, Cz-
erny M, Ferdinandy P , Frey UH, Heusch G, Holfeld J, Kleinbongard P , Kunst G, Lang I, Lentini S, Madonna R, Meybohm P , Muneretto C, Obadia JF, Perrino C, Prunier F, Sluijter JPG, Van Laake LW, Sousa-Uva M, Hausenloy DJ. ESC Joint Working Groups on Cardiovascular Surgery and the Cellular 
Biology of the Heart Position Paper: peri-operative myocardial injury and 
infarction in patients undergoing coronary artery bypass graft surgery. Eur 
Heart J. 2017;38:2392–2411.
 73. Moussa ID, Klein LW, Shah B, Mehran R, Mack MJ, Brilakis ES, Reilly JP , 
Zoghbi G, Holper E, Stone GW. Consideration of a new definition of clini-
cally relevant myocardial infarction after coronary revascularization: an 
expert consensus document from the Society for Cardiovascular Angiog-
raphy and Interventions (SCAI). J Am Coll Cardiol. 2013;62:1563–1570.
 74. Apple FS, Murakami MM. Cardiac troponin and creatine kinase MB 
monitoring during in-hospital myocardial reinfarction. Clin Chem. 
2005;51:460–463. 75. Sinning JM, Hammerstingl C, Schueler R, Neugebauer A, Keul S, Ghanem A, Mellert F, Schiller W, Müller C, Vasa-Nicotera M, Zur B, Welz A, Grube 
E, Nickenig G, Werner N. The prognostic value of acute and chronic tropo-
nin elevation after transcatheter aortic valve implantation. EuroInterven-
tion. 2016;11:1522–1529.
 76. Wang TKM, Stewart RAH, Ramanathan T, Choi D, Gamble G, Ruygrok 
PN, White HD. Diagnosis of myocardial infarction and prognostic utility of 
highsensitivity troponin T after isolated aortic valve replacement. Clin Trials 
Regul Sci Cardiol. 2016;16:1–5.
 77. Devereaux PJ, Xavier D, Pogue J, Guyatt G, Sigamani A, Garutti I, Leslie K, RaoMelacini P , Chrolavicius S, Yang H, Macdonald C, Avezum A, Lanthier L, Hu W, Yusuf S; POISE (PeriOperative ISchemic Evaluation) Investigators. 
Characteristics and short-term prognosis of perioperative myocardial in-
farction in patients undergoing noncardiac surgery: a cohort study. Ann 
Intern Med. 2011;154:523–528.
 78. The Vascular Events in Noncardiac Surgery Patients Cohort Evaluation (VI-
SION) Study Investigators. Association between postoperative troponin 
levels and 30-day mortality among patients undergoing noncardiac sur -
gery. JAMA. 2012;307:2295–2304.
 79. Nagele P , Brown F, Gage BF, Gibson DW, Miller JP , Jaffe AS, Apple FS, Scott MG. High-sensitivity cardiac troponin T in prediction and diagnosis 
of myocardial infarction and long-term mortality after noncardiac surgery. 
Am Heart J. 2013;166:325–332.
 80. Weber M, Luchner A, Manfred S, Mueller C, Liebetrau C, Schlitt A, Apos-
tolovic S, Jankovic R, Bankovic D, Jovic M, Mitrovic V, Nef H, Mollmann H, 
Hamm CW. Incremental value of high-sensitive troponin T in addition to 
the revised cardiac index for perioperative risk stratification in non-cardiac 
surgery. Eur Heart J. 2013;34:853–862.
 81. Kavsak PA, Walsh M, Srinathan S, Thorlacius L, Buse GL, Botto F, Pet-
tit S, McQueen MJ, Hill SA, Thomas S, Mrkobrada M, Alonso-Coello 
P , Berwanger O, Biccard BM, Cembrowski G, Chan MT, Chow CK, de Miguel A, Garcia M, Graham MM, Jacka MJ, Kueh JH, Li SC, Lit LC, 
Martínez-Brú C, Naidoo P , Nagele P , Pearse RM, Rodseth RN, Sessler 
DI, Sigamani A, Szczeklik W, Tiboni M, Villar JC, Wang CY, Xavier D, Devereaux PJ. High sensitivity troponin T concentrations in patients un-
dergoing noncardiac surgery: a prospective cohort study. Clin Biochem. 
2011;44:1021–1024.
 82. Devereaux PJ, Biccard BM, Sigamani A, Xavier D, Chan MTV, Srinathan SK, Walsh M, Abraham V, Pearse R, Wang CY, Sessler DI, Kurz A, Szcze-klik W, Berwanger O, Villar JC, Malaga G, Garg AX, Chow CK, Ackland 
G, Patel A, Borges FK, Belley-Cote EP , Duceppe E, Spence J, Tandon V, 
Williams C, Sapsford RJ, Polanczyk CA, Tiboni M, Alonso-Coello P , Fa-
ruqui A, Heels-Ansdell D, Lamy A, Whitlock R, LeManach Y, Roshanov 
PS, McGillion M, Kavsak P , McQueen MJ, Thabane L, Rodseth RN, Buse GAL, Bhandari M, Garutti I, Jacka MJ, Schünemann HJ, Cortes OL, Co-riat P , Dvirnik N, Botto F, Pettit S, Jaffe AS, Guyatt GH. Association of 
postoperative high-sensitivity troponin levels with myocardial injury and 
30-day mortality among patients undergoing noncardiac surgery. JAMA. 
2017;317:1642–1651.
 83. Puelacher C, Lurati Buse G, Seeberger D, Sazgary L, Marbot S, Lampart A, Espinola J, Kindler C, Hammerer A, Seeberger E, Strebel I, Wildi K, Tweren-
bold R, du Fay de Lavallaz J, Steiner L, Gurke L, Breidthardt T, Rentsch K, 
Buser A, Gualandro DM, Osswald S, Mueller C. Perioperative myocardial 
injury after non-cardiac surgery: incidence, mortality, and characteriza-
tion. Circulation. 2018;137:1221–1232.
 84. Duvall WL, Sealove B, Pungoti C, Katz D, Moreno P , Kim M. Angiographic 
inves-tigation of the pathophysiology of perioperative myocardial infarc-
tion. Catheter Cardiovasc Interv. 2012;80:768–776.
 85. Landesberg G, Beattie WS, Mosseri M, Jaffe AS, Alpert JS. Perioperative myocardial infarction. Circulation. 2009;119:2936–2944.
 86. Hanson I, Kahn J, Dixon S, Goldstein J. Angiographic and clinical charac-teristics of type 1 versus type 2 perioperative myocardial infarction. Cath-
eter Cardiovasc Interv. 2013;82:622–628.
 87. Gualandro DM, Campos CA, Calderaro D, Yu PC, Marques AC, Pastana AF, Lemos PA, Caramelli B. Coronary plaque rupture in patients with myo-
cardial infarction after noncardiac surgery: frequent and dangerous. Ath-
erosclerosis. 2012;222:191–195.
 88. Kociol RD, Pang PS, Gheorghiade M, Fonarow GC, O’Connor CM, Felker GM. Troponin elevation in heart failure prevalence, mechanisms, and clini-
cal implications. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2010;56:1071–1078.
 89. Januzzi JL Jr, Filippatos G, Nieminen M, Gheorghiade M. Troponin eleva-tion in patients with heart failure: on behalf of the third Universal Defini-tion of Myocardial Infarction Global Task Force: Heart Failure Section. Eur 
Heart J. 2012;33:2265–2271.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on November 12, 2025

Thygesen et al 2018 ESC/ACC/AHA/WHF Fourth Universal Definition of MI
November 13, 2018 Circulation. 2018;138:e618–e651. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000617
 e648
CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINES 90. Lyon AR, Bossone E, Schneider B, Sechtem U, Citro R, Underwood SR, 
Sheppard MN, Figtree GA, Parodi G, Akashi YJ, Ruschitzka F, Filippatos G, 
Mebazaa A, Omerovic E. Current state of knowledge on Takotsubo syn-
drome: a Position Statement from the Task Force on Takotsubo Syndrome of the Heart Failure Association of the European Society of Cardiology. Eur J Heart Fail. 2016;18:8–27.
 91. Templin C, Ghadri JR, Diekmann J, Napp LC, Bataiosu DR, Jaguszewski M, Cammann VL, Sarcon A, Geyer V, Neumann CA, Seifert B, Hellermann 
J, Schwyzer M, Eisenhardt K, Jenewein J, Franke J, Katus HA, Burgdorf C, 
Schunkert H, Moeller C, Thiele H, Bauersachs J, Tschöpe C, Schultheiss 
HP , Laney CA, Rajan L, Michels G, Pfister R, Ukena C, Böhm M, Erbel R, 
Cuneo A, Kuck KH, Jacobshagen C, Hasenfuss G, Karakas M, Koenig W, 
Rottbauer W, Said SM, Braun-Dullaeus RC, Cuculi F, Banning A, Fischer 
TA, Vasankari T, Airaksinen KE, Fijalkowski M, Rynkiewicz A, Pawlak M, 
Opolski G, Dworakowski R, MacCarthy P , Kaiser C, Osswald S, Galiuto 
L, Crea F, Dichtl W, Franz WM, Empen K, Felix SB, Delmas C, Lairez O, Erne P , Bax JJ, Ford I, Ruschitzka F, Prasad A, Lüscher TF. Clinical fea-tures and outcomes of takotsubo (stress) cardiomyopathy. N Engl J Med. 
2015;373:929–938.
 92. Medeiros K, O’Connor MJ, Baicu CF, Fitzgibbons TP , Shaw P , Tighe DA, Zile MR, Aurigemma GP . Systolic and diastolic mechanics in stress cardio-myopathy. Circulation. 2014;129:1659–1667.
 93. Sharkey SW, Lesser JR, Zenovich AG, Maron MS, Lindberg J, Longe TF, 
Maron BJ. Acute and reversible cardiomyopathy provoked by stress in 
women from the United States. Circulation. 2005;111:472–479.
 94. Redfors B, Råmunddal T, Shao Y, Omerovic E. Takotsubo triggered by acute myocardial infarction: a common but overlooked syndrome?  
J Geriatr Cardiol. 2014;11:171–173.
 95. Agewall S, Beltrame JF, Reynolds HR, Niessner A, Rosano G, Caforio AL, De Caterina R, Zimarino M, Roffi M, Kjeldsen K, Atar D, Kaski JC, Sechtem U, Tornvall P; Working Group on Cardiovascular Pharmacotherapy. ESC 
Working Group position paper on myocardial infarction with non-ob-
structive coronary arteries. Eur Heart J. 2017;38:143–153.
 96. Lindahl B, Baron T, Erlinge D, Hadziosmanovic N, Nordenskjöld AM, Gard A, Jernberg T. Medical therapy for secondary prevention and long-term 
outcome in patients with myocardial infarction with nonobstructive coro-
nary artery disease. Circulation. 2017;135:1481–1489.
 97. Pasupathy S, Air T, Dreyer RP , Tavella R, Beltrame JF. Systematic review 
of patients presenting with suspected myocardial infarction and nonob-
structive coronary arteries. Circulation. 2015;131:861–870.
 98. Smilowitz NR, Mahajan AM, Roe MT, Hellkamp AS, Chiswell K, Gulati 
M, Reynolds HR. Mortality of myocardial infarction by sex, age, and ob-
structive coronary artery disease status in the ACTION Registry-GWTG (Acute Coronary Treatment and Intervention Outcomes Network 
Registry-Get With the Guidelines). Circ Cardiovasc Qual Outcomes. 
2017;10:e003443.
 99. Jacobs LH, van de Kerkhof J, Mingels AM, Kleijnen VW, van der Sande 
FM, Wodzig WK, Kooman JP , van Dieijen-Visser MP . Haemodialysis pa-
tients longitudinally assessed by highly sensitive cardiac troponin T and commercial cardiac troponin T and cardiac troponin I assays. Ann Clin 
Biochem. 2009;46:283–290.
 100. Unger ED, Dubin RF, Deo R, Daruwalla V, Friedman JL, Medina C, 
Beussink L, Freed BH, Shah SJ. Association of chronic kidney disease with abnormal cardiac mechanics and adverse outcomes in patients with heart failure and preserved ejection fraction. Eur J Heart Fail. 
2016;18:103–112.
 101. Twerenbold R, Wildi K, Jaeger C, Gimenez MR, Reiter M, Reichlin T, Walukiewicz A, Gugala M, Krivoshei L, Marti N, Moreno Weidmann 
Z, Hillinger P , Puelacher C, Rentsch K, Honegger U, Schumacher C, 
Zurbriggen F, Freese M, Stelzig C, Campodarve I, Bassetti S, Osswald S, 
Mueller C. Optimal cutoff levels of more sensitive cardiac troponin as-
says for the early diagnosis of myocardial infarction in patients with renal 
dysfunction. Circulation. 2015;131:2041–2050.
 102. deFilippi C, Seliger SL, Kelley W, Duh SH, Hise M, Christenson RH, Wolf 
M, Gaggin H, Januzzi J. Interpreting cardiac troponin results from high-
sensitivity assays in chronic kidney disease without acute coronary syn-
drome. Clin Chem. 2012;58:1342–1351.
 103. Michos ED, Wilson LM, Yeh HC, Berger Z, Suarez-Cuervo C, Stacy SR, Bass EB. Prognostic value of cardiac troponin in patients with chronic kidney disease without suspected acute coronary syndrome: a systematic review and metaanalysis. Ann Intern Med. 2014;161:491–501.
 104. Parikh RH, Seliger SL, deFilippi CR. Use and interpretation of high sensi-
tivity cardiac troponins in patients with chronic kidney disease with and 
without acute myocardial infarction. Clin Biochem. 2015;48:247–253. 105. Friden V, Starnberg K, Muslimovic A, Ricksten SE, Bjurman C, Forsgard N, Wickman A, Hammarsten O. Clearance of cardiac troponin T with and 
without kidney function. Clin Biochem. 2017;50:468–474.
 106. Stacy SR, Suarez-Cuervo C, Berger Z, Wilson LM, Yeh HC, Bass EB, 
Michos ED. Role of troponin in patients with chronic kidney disease and suspected acute coronary syndrome: a systematic review. Ann Intern 
Med. 2014;161:502–512.
 107. Guest TM, Ramanathan AV, Tuteur PG, Schechtman KB, Ladenson JH, Jaffe AS. Myocardial injury in critically ill medical patients: a surprisingly 
frequent complication. JAMA. 1995;273:1945–1949.
 108. Babuin L, Vasile VC, Rio Perez JA, Alegria JR, Chai HS, Afessa B, Jaffe AS. 
Elevated cardiac troponin is an independent risk factor for shortand long-
term mortality in medical intensive care unit patients. Crit Care Med. 
2008;36:759–765.
 109. Landesberg G, Vesselov Y, Einav S, Goodman S, Sprung CL, Weissman C. Myocardial ischemia, cardiac troponin, and long-term survival of high-cardiac risk critically ill intensive care unit patients. Crit Care Med. 2005;33:1281–1287.
 110. Thygesen K, Alpert JS, Jaffe AS, White HD. Diagnostic application of the 
universal definition of myocardial infarction in the intensive care unit. 
Curr Opin Crit Care. 2008;14:543–548.
 111. Vatner SF, Baig H, Manders WT, Maroko PR. The effects of coronary artery reperfusion on myocardial infarct size calculated from creatine kinase. J 
Clin Invest. 1978;61:1048–1056.
 112. Starnberg K, Jeppsson A, Lindahl B, Hammarsten O. Revision of the 
troponin T release mechanism from damaged human myocardium. Clin 
Chem. 2014;60:1098–1104.
 113. Jaffe AS, Moeckel M, Giannitsis E, Huber K, Mair J, Mueller C, Plebani 
M, Thygesen K, Lindahl B. In search for the Holy Grail: suggestions for 
studies to define delta changes to diagnose or exclude acute myocar -
dial infarction: a position paper from the study group on biomarkers of 
the Acute Cardiovascular Care Association. Eur Heart J Acute Cardiovasc 
Care. 2014;3:313–316.
 114. Reichlin T, Irfan A, Twerenbold R, Reiter M, Hochholzer W, Burkhalter 
H, Bassetti S, Steuer S, Winkler K, Peter F, Meissner J, Haaf P , Potocki M, 
Drexler B, Osswald S, Mueller C. Utility of absolute and relative changes 
in cardiac troponin concentrations in the early diagnosis of acute myocar -
dial infarction. Circulation. 2011;124:136–145.
 115. Mueller M, Biener M, Vafaie M, Doerr S, Keller T, Blankenberg S, Katus HA, Giannitsis E. Absolute and relative kinetic changes of high-sensitivity cardiac troponin T in acute coronary syndrome and in patients with in-
creased troponin in the absence of acute coronary syndrome. Clin Chem. 
2012;58:209–218.
 116. Keller T, Zeller T, Ojeda F, Tzikas S, Lillpopp L, Sinning C, Wild P , Genth-
Zotz S, Warnholtz A, Giannitsis E, Mockel M, Bickel C, Peetz D, Lackner 
K, Baldus S, Munzel T, Blankenberg S. Serial changes in highly sensi-tive troponin I assay and early diagnosis of myocardial infarction. JAMA. 
2011;306:2684–2693.
 117. Jaffe AS, Apple FS, Morrow DA, Lindahl B, Katus HA. Being rational about (im)precision: a statement from the Biochemistry Subcommittee 
of the Joint European Society of Cardiology/American College of 
Cardiology Foundation/American Heart Association/World Heart Federation Task force for the definition of myocardial infarction. Clin Chem. 2010;56:941–943.
 118. Sandoval Y, Apple FS. The global need to define normality: the 99th 
percentile value of cardiac troponin. Clin Chem. 2013;60:455–462.
 119. Apple FS, Sandoval Y, Jaffe AS, Ordonez-Llanos J; IFCC Task Force on Clinical Applications of Cardiac Bio-Markers. Cardiac troponin assays: 
guide to understanding analytical characteristics and their impact on 
clinical care. Clin Chem. 2017;63:73–81.
 120. Giannitsis E, Kurz K, Hallermayer K, Jarausch J, Jaffe AS, Katus HA. Analytical validation of a high-sensitivity cardiac troponin T assay. Clin 
Chem. 2010;56:254–261.
 121. Frankenstein L, Wu AHB, Hallermayer K, Wians FH, Giannitsis E, Katus 
HA. Biological variation and reference change value of high-sensitivity 
troponin T in healthy individuals during short and intermediate follow-up 
periods. Clin Chem. 2011;57:1068–1071.
 122. Apple FS, Ler R, Murakami MM. Determination of 19 cardiac troponin I and T assay 99th percentile values from a common presumably healthy population. Clin Chem. 2012;58:1574–1581.
 123. Wu AHB, Christenson RH, Greene DN, Jaffe AS, Kavsak PA, Ordonez-Llanos J, Apple FS. Clinical laboratory practice recommendations for the 
use of cardiac troponin in acute coronary syndrome: expert opinion from 
the Academy of the American Association for Clinical Chemistry and 
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on November 12, 2025

Thygesen et al 2018 ESC/ACC/AHA/WHF Fourth Universal Definition of MI
Circulation. 2018;138:e618–e651. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000617 November 13, 2018
 e649
CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINESthe Task Force on Clinical Applications of Cardiac Bio-Markers of the 
International Federation of Clinical Chemistry and Laboratory Medicine. 
Clin Chem. 2018;64:645–655.
 124. Collinson PO, Heung YM, Gaze D, Boa F, Senior R, Christenson R, Apple FS. Influence of population selection on the 99th percentile reference 
value for cardiac troponin assays. Clin Chem. 2012;58:219–225.
 125. McKie PM, Heublein DM, Scott CG, Gantzer ML, Mehta RA, Rodeheffer RJ, 
Redfield MM, Burnett JC Jr, Jaffe AS. Defining high-sensitivity cardiac tropo-
nin concentrations in the community. Clin Chem. 2013;59:1099–1107.
 126. Olivieri F, Galeazzi R, Giavarina D, Testa R, Abbatecola AM, Ceka A, Tamburrini P , Busco F, Lazzarini R, Monti D, Franceschi C, Procopio AD, Antonicelli R. Aged-related increase of high sensitive troponin T and its 
implication in acute myocardial infarction diagnosis of elderly patients. 
Mech Ageing Dev. 2012;133:300–305.
 127. Reiter M, Twerenbold R, Reichlin T, Haaf P , Peter F, Meissner J, Hochholzer W, Stelzig C, Freese M, Heinisch C, Breidthardt T, Freidank H, Winkler 
K, Campodarve I, Gea J, Mueller C. Early diagnosis of acute myocardial 
infarction in the elderly using more sensitive cardiac troponin assays. Eur Heart J. 2011;32:1379–1389.
 128. Shah AS, Griffiths M, Lee KK, McAllister DA, Hunter AL, Ferry AV, Cruikshank A, Reid A, Stoddart M, Strachan F, Walker S, Collinson PO, 
Apple FS, Gray AJ, Fox KA, Newby DE, Mills NL. High sensitivity cardiac 
troponin and the under-diagnosis of myocardial infarction in women: prospective cohort study. BMJ. 2015;350:g7873.
 129. Eggers KM, Johnston N, James S, Lindahl B, Venge P . Cardiac troponin I levels in patients with non-ST-elevation acute coronary syndrome-the 
importance of gender. Am Heart J. 2014;168:317.e1–324.e1.
 130. Balmelli C, Meune C, Twerenbold R, Reichlin T, Rieder S, Drexler B, Rubini 
MG, Mosimann T, Reiter M, Haaf P , Mueller M, Ernst S, Ballarino P , Alafify 
AA, Zellweger C, Wildi K, Moehring B, Vilaplana C, Bernhard D, Merk S, 
Ebmeyer S, Freidank H, Osswald S, Mueller C. Comparison of the per -
formances of cardiac troponins, including sensitive assays, and copeptin 
in the diagnostic of acute myocardial infarction and long-term prognosis 
between women and men. Am Heart J. 2013;166:30–37.
 131. Bjurman C, Larsson M, Johanson P , Petzold M, Lindahl B, Fu ML, 
Hammarsten O. Small changes in troponin T levels are common in 
patients with non-ST segment elevation myocardial infarction and are 
linked to higher mortality. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2013;62:1231–1238.
 132. D’Souza M, Sarkisian L, Saaby L, Poulsen TS, Gerke O, Larsen TB, 
Diederichsen ACP , Jangaard N, Diederichsen SZ, Hosbond S, Hove J, 
Thygesen K, Mickley H. Diagnosis of unstable angina pectoris has de-
clined markedly with the advent of more sensitive troponin assays. Am J 
Med. 2015;128:852–860.
 133. Reichlin T, Twerenbold R, Reiter M, Steuer S, Bassetti S, Balmelli C, 
Winkler K, Kurz S, Stelzig C, Freese M, Drexler B, Haaf P , Zellweger C, Osswald S, Mueller C. Introduction of high-sensitivity troponin assays: 
impact on myocardial infarction incidence and prognosis. Am J Med. 
2012;125:1205–1213.
 134. Sandoval Y, Apple FS, Smith SW. High-sensitivity cardiac troponin assays 
and unstable angina. Eur Heart J Acute Cardiovasc Care. 2018;7:120–128.
 135. Morrow DA. Clinician’s guide to early rule-out strategies with high-sensi-
tivity cardiac troponin. Circulation. 2017;135:1612–1616.
 136. Twerenbold R, Boeddinghaus J, Nestelberger T, Wildi K, Rubini Gimenez M, Badertscher P , Mueller C. Clinical use of high-sensitivity cardiac tropo-
nin in patients with suspected myocardial infarction. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2017;70:996–1012.
 137. Cullen L, Mueller C, Parsonage WA, Wildi K, Greenslade JH, Twerenbold R, Aldous S, Meller B, Tate JR, Reichlin T, Hammett CJ, Zellweger C, 
Ungerer JPJ, Rubini Gimenez M, Troughton R, Murray K, Brown AFT, 
Mueller M, George P , Mosimann T, Flaws DF, Reiter M, Lamanna A, Haaf P , Pemberton CJ, Richards AM, Chu K, Reid CM, Peacock WF, Jaffe AS, Florkowski C, Deely JM, Than M. Validation of high-sensitivity troponin I in a 2-hour diagnostic strategy to assess 30-day outcomes in emergency 
department patients with possible acute coronary syndrome. J Am Coll 
Cardiol. 2013;62:1242–1249.
 138. Pickering JW, Than MP , Cullen L, Aldous S, Ter Avest E, Body R, Carlton EW, Collinson P , Dupuy AM, Ekelund U, Eggers KM, Florkowski CM, Freund Y, George P , Goodacre S, Greenslade JH, Jaffe AS, Lord SJ, 
Mokhtari A, Mueller C, Munro A, Mustapha S, Parsonage W, Peacock 
WF, Pemberton C, Richards AM, Sanchis J, Staub LP , Troughton R, 
Twerenbold R, Wildi K, Young J. Rapid ruleout of acute myocardial in-
farction with a single high-sensitivity cardiac troponin T measurement below the limit of detection: a collaborative meta-analysis. Ann Intern 
Med. 2017;166:715–724. 139. Mueller C, Giannitsis E, Möckel M, Huber K, Mair J, Plebani M, Thygesen K, Jaffe AS, Lindahl B; Biomarker Study Group of the ESC Acute 
Cardiovascular Care Association. Rapid rule out of acute myocardial in-
farction: novel biomarker-based strategies. Eur Heart J Acute Cardiovasc 
Care. 2017;6:218–222.
 140. Boeddinghaus J, Nestelberger T, Twerenbold R, Wildi K, Badertscher P , 
Cupa J, Burge T, Machler P , Corbiere S, Grimm K, Rubini Gimenez M, 
Puelacher C, Shrestha S, Flores Widmer D, Fuhrmann J, Hillinger P , Sabti 
Z, Honegger U, Schaerli N, Kozhuharov N, Rentsch K, Miro O, Lopez 
Barbeito B, MartinSanchez FJ, Rodriguez-Adrada E, Morawiec B, Kawecki 
D, Ganovska E, Parenica J, Lohrmann J, Kloos W, Buser A, Geigy N, Keller DI, Osswald S, Reichlin T, Muller C. Direct comparison of 4 very early 
rule-out strategies for acute myocardial infarction using high-sensitivity 
cardiac troponin I. Circulation. 2017;135:1597–1611.
 141. Möckel M, Giannitsis E, Mueller C, Huber K, Jaffe AS, Mair J, Plebani M, Thygesen K, Lindahl B; Biomarker Study Group of the European Society 
of Cardiology Acute Cardiovascular Care Association. Rule-in of acute 
myocardial infarction: focus on troponin. Eur Heart J Acute Cardiovasc 
Care. 2017;6:212–217.
 142. Jaffe AS, White H. Ruling-in myocardial injury and ruling-out myocardial infarction with the European Society of Cardiology (ESC) 1-hour algo-
rithm. Circulation. 2016;134:1542–1545.
 143. Sandoval Y, Herzog CA, Love SA, Cao J, Hu Y, Wu AHB, Gilbertson D, 
Brunelli SM, Young A, Ler R, Apple FS. Prognostic value of serial changes 
in high-sensitivity cardiac troponin I and T over 3 months using reference 
change values in hemodialysis patients. Clin Chem. 2016;62:631–638.
 144. DeFilippi CF, Herzog CA. Interpreting cardiac biomarkers in the setting of chronic kidney disease. Clin Chem. 2017;63:59–65.
 145. Neeland IJ, Drazner MH, Berry JD, Ayers CR, deFilippi C, Seliger SL, Nambi 
V, McGuire DK, Omland T, de Lemos JA. Biomarkers of chronic cardiac 
injury and hemodynamic stress identify a malignant phenotype of left ventricular hypertrophy in the general population. J Am Coll Cardiol. 
2013;61:187–195.
 146. Biner M, Mueller M, Vafaie M, Jaffe AS, Widera C, Katus HA, Giannitsis 
E. Diagnostic performance of rising, falling, or rising and falling kinetic 
changes of high-sensitivity cardiac troponin T in an unselected emer -
gency department population. Eur Heart J Acute Cardiovasc Care. 2013;2:314–322.
 147. Amsterdam EA, Wenger NK, Brindis RG, Casey DE Jr, Ganiats TG, Holmes 
DR Jr, Jaffe AS, Jneid H, Kelly RF, Kontos MC, Levine GN, Liebson PR, 
Mukherjee D, Peterson ED, Sabatine MS, Smalling RW, Zieman SJ. 
2014 AHA/ACC guideline for the management of patients with 
non-ST-elevation acute coronary syndromes. Circulation. 2014;130:  
e344–e426.
 148. Bagai A, Jollis JG, Dauerman HL, Peng SA, Rokos IC, Bates ER, French 
WJ, Granger CB, Roe MT. Emergency department bypass for ST-segment-
elevation myocardial infarction patients identified with a prehospital 
electrocardiogram. Circulation. 2013;128:352–359.
 149. Scirica BM, Morrow DA, Budaj A, Dalby AJ, Mohanavelu S, Qin J, Aroesty J, Hedgepeth CM, Stone PH, Braunwald E. Ischemia detected on con-tinuous elec-trocardiography after acute coronary syndrome. J Am Coll 
Cardiol. 2009;53:1411–1421.
 150. Wang K, Asinger RW, Marriott HJ. ST-segment elevation in condi-tions other than acute myocardial infarction. N Engl J Med. 2003;349:  
2128–2135.
 151. de Winter RJ, Verouden NJW, Wellens HJJ, Wilde AAM. A new ECG sign of proximal LAD occlusion. N Engl J Med. 2008;359:2071–2073.
 152. de Winter RW, Adams R, Verouden NJW, de Winter RJ. Precordial junc-tional ST-segment depression with tall symmetric T-waves signifying prox-
imal LAD occlusion, case reports of STEMI equivalence. J Electrocardiol. 2016;49:76–80.
 153. de Zwaan C, Bär FWHM, Wellens HJJ. Characteristic electrocardiographic pattern indicating a critical stenosis high in left anterior descending coro-
nary artery in patients admitted because of impending myocardial infarc-
tion. Am Heart J. 1982;103:730–736.
 154. Wong CK, Gao W, Stewart RA, Benatar J, French JK, Aylward PE, White HD; HERO-2 Investigators. aVR ST elevation: an important but neglected sign in ST elevation acute myocardial infarction. Eur Heart J. 
2010;31:1845–1853.
 155. Matetzky S, Freimark D, Feinberg MS, Novikov I, Rath S, Rabinowitz B, Kaplinsky E, Hod H. Acute myocardial infarction with isolated ST-
segment ele-vation in posterior chest leads V
7-9: “hidden” ST-segment 
elevations revealing acute posterior infarction. J Am Coll Cardiol. 
1999;34:748–753.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on November 12, 2025

Thygesen et al 2018 ESC/ACC/AHA/WHF Fourth Universal Definition of MI
November 13, 2018 Circulation. 2018;138:e618–e651. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000617
 e650
CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINES 156. Wong CK, White HD. Patients with circumflex occlusions miss out on 
reperfusion: how to recognize and manage them. Curr Opin Cardiol. 
2012;27:327–330.
 157. Lopez-Sendon J, Coma-Canella I, Alcasena S, Seoane J, Gamallo C. Electrocardiographic findings in acute right ventricular infarc-
tion: sensitivity and specificity of electrocardiographic alterations in right precordial leads V
4R, V3R, V1, V2 and V3. J Am Coll Cardiol. 
1985;6:1273–1279.
 158. Deluigi CC, Ong P , Hill S, Wagner A, Kispert E, Klingel K, Kandolf R, Sechtem U, Mahrholdt H. ECG findings in comparison to cardiovascular 
MR imaging in viral myocarditis. Int J Cardiol. 2013;165:100–106.
 159. Biagini E, Pazzi C, Olivotto I, Musumeci B, Limongelli G, Boriani G, Pacileo G, Mastromarino V, Reggiani MLB, Lorenzini M, Lai F, Berardini A, 
Mingardi F, Rosmini S, Resciniti E, Borghi C, Autore C, Cecchi F, Rapezzi 
C. Usefulness of electrocardiographic patterns at presentation to predict 
long-term risk of cardiac death in patients with hypertrophic cardiomy-opathy. Am J Cardiol. 2016;118:432–439.
 160. Guerra F, Rrapaj E, Pongetti G, Fabbrizioli A, Pelizzoni V, Giannini I, Aschieri D, Costantini C, Capucci A. Differences and similarities of repo-larization patterns during hospitalization for takotsubo cardiomyopathy 
and acute coronary syndrome. Am J Cardiol. 2013;112:1720–1724.
 161. Savage RM, Wagner GS, Ideker RE, Podolsky SA, Hackel DB. Correlation of postmortem anatomic findings with electrocardiographic changes in 
patients with myocardial infarction: retrospective study of patients with typical anterior and posterior infarcts. Circulation. 1977;55:279–285.
 162. Horan LG, Flowers NC, Johnson JC. Significance of the diagnostic Q wave of myocardial infarction. Circulation. 1971;43:428–436.
 163. Chaitman BR, Hardison RM, Adler D, Gebhart S, Grogan M, Ocampo S, Sopko G, Ramires JA, Schneider D, Frye RL; Bypass Angioplasty Revascularization Investigation 2 Diabetes (BARI 2D) Study Group. 
The Bypass Angioplasty Revascularization Investigation 2 Diabetes 
randomized trial of different treatment strategies in type 2 diabetes mellitus with stable ischemic heart disease. Circulation. 2009;120:  
2529–2540.
 164. Burgess DC, Hunt D, Zannino D, Williamson E, Davis TME, Laakso M, Kesaniemi YA, Zhang J, Sy RW, Lehto S, Mann S, Keech AC. 
Incidence and predictors of silent myocardial infarction in type 2 dia-
betes and the effect of fenofibrate: an analysis from the Fenofibrate 
Intervention and Event Lowering in Diabetes (FIELD) study. Eur Heart J.  
2010;31:92–99.
 165. Kwong RY, Sattar H, Wu H, Vorobiof G, Gandla V, Steel K, Siu S, Brown KA. Incidence and prognostic implication of unrecognized myocar -
dial scar characterized by cardiac magnetic resonance in diabetic pa-
tients without clinical evidence of myocardial infarction. Circulation. 
2008;118:1011–1020.
 166. Sgarbossa EB, Pinsky SL, Barbagelata A, Underwood DA, Gates KB, Topol 
EJ, Califf RM, Wagner GS; GUSTO-1 (Global Utilization of Streptokinase 
and Tissue Plasminogen Activator for Occluded Coronary Arteries) 
Investigators. Electrocardiographic diagnosis of evolving acute myocar -
dial infarction in the presence of left bundle branch block. N Engl J Med. 1996;334:481–487.
 167. Cai Q, Mehta N, Sgarbossa EB, Pinski SL, Wagner GS, Califf RM, 
Barbagelata A. The left bundle-branch block puzzle in the 2013 ST-
elevation myocardial infarction guideline: from falsely declaring emer -
gency to denying reperfusion in a high-risk population. Are the Sgarbossa Criteria ready for prime time? Am Heart J. 2013;166:409–413.
 168. Widimsky P , Rohác F, Stásek J, Kala P , Rokyta R, Kuzmanov B, Jakl M, 
Poloczek M, Kanovsky J, Bernat I, Hlinomaz O, Belohlávek J, Král A, 
Mrázek V, Grigorov V, Djambazov S, Petr R, Knot J, Bílková D, Fischerová 
M, Vondrák K, Maly M, Lorencová A. Primary angioplasty in acute myo-
cardial infarction with right bundle branch block: should new onset right bundle branch block be added to future guidelines as an indication for reperfusion therapy? Eur Heart J. 2012;33:86–95.
 169. Brandt RR, Hammill SC, Higano ST. Electrocardiographic diagnosis 
of acute myocardial infarction during ventricular pacing. Circulation. 
1998;97:2274–2275.
 170. Pradhan R, Chaudhary A, Donato AA. Predictive accuracy of ST depres-sion during rapid atrial fibrillation on the presence of obstructive coro-nary artery disease. Am J Emerg Med. 2012;30:1042–1047.
 171. Androulakis A, Aznaouridis KA, Aggeli CJ, Roussakis GN, Michaelides AP , Kartalis AN, Stougiannos PN, Dilaveris PE, Misovoulos PI, Stefanadis 
CI, Kallikazaros IE. Transient ST-segment depression during paroxysms 
of atrial fibrillation in otherwise normal individuals. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2007;50:1909–1911. 172. Vakil K, Gandhi S, Abidi KS, Tholakanahalli V, Sharma A, Zaharova M, MadlonKay R. Deep T-wave inversions: cardiac ischemia or memory?  
J Cardiovasc Dis. 2014;2:116–119.
 173. Stillman AE, Oudkerk M, Bluemke D, Bremerich J, Esteves FP , Garcia EV, Gutberlet M, Hundley WG, Jerosch-Herold M, Kuijpers D, Kwong RK, 
Nagel E, Lerakis S, Oshinski J, Paul JF, Underwood R, Wintersperger BJ, 
Rees MR. Assessment of acute myocardial infarction: current status and recommendations from the North American Society for Cardiovascular 
Imaging and the European Society of Cardiac Radiology. Int J Cardiovasc 
Imaging. 2011;27:7–24.
 174. Scirica BM. Acute coronary syndrome: emerging tools for diagnosis and 
risk assessment. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2010;55:1403–1415.
 175. Kontos MC, Diercks DB, Kirk JD. Emergency department and of-
fice-based evaluation of patients with chest pain. Mayo Clin Proc. 
2010;85:284–299.
 176. Lewis WR. Echocardiography in the evaluation of patients in chest pain 
units. Cardiol Clin. 2005;23:531–539.
 177. Flachskampf FA, Schmid M, Rost C, Achenbach S, de Maria AN, Daniel WG. Cardiac imaging after myocardial infarction. Eur Heart J. 2011;32:272–283.
 178. Zamorano J, Wallbridge DR, Ge J, Drozd J, Nesser J, Erbel R. Non-invasive assessment of cardiac physiology by tissue Doppler echocardiography. 
Eur Heart J. 1997;18:330–339.
 179. Kaul S, Miller JG, Grayburn PA, Hashimoto S, Hibberd M, Holland MR, 
Houle HC, Klein AL, Knoll P , Lang RM, Lindner JR, McCulloch ML, Metz 
S, Mor-Avi V, Pearlman AS, Pellikka PA, DeMars Plambeck N, Prater D, 
Porter TR, Sahn DJ, Thomas JD, Thomenius KE, Weissman NJ. A sug-
gested roadmap for cardiovascular ultrasound research for the future.  
J Am Soc Echocardiogr. 2011;24:455–464.
 180. O’Connor MK, Hammell T, Gibbons RJ. In vitro validation of a simple tomographic technique for estimation of percentage myocardium at risk 
using methoxyisobutyl isonitrile technetium 99m (sestamibi). Eur J Nucl Med. 1990;17:69–76.
 181. Carrio I, Cowie MR, Yamazaki J, Udelson J, Camici PG. Cardiac sym-pathetic imaging with mIBG in heart failure. JACC Cardiovasc Imaging. 2010;3:92–100.
 182. Nahrendorf M, Sosnovik DE, French BA, Swirski FK, Bengel F, Sadeghi MM, Lindner JR, Wu JC, Kraitchman DL, Fayad ZA, Sinusas AJ. 
Multimodality cardiovascular molecular imaging, Part II. Circ Cardiovasc 
Imaging. 2009;2:56–70.
 183. Kramer CM, Sinusas AJ, Sosnovik DE, French BA, Bengel FM. 
Multimodality imaging of myocardial injury and remodelling. J Nucl Med. 
2010;51:107S–121S.
 184. Taegtmeyer H. Tracing cardiac metabolism in vivo: one substrate at a 
time. J Nucl Med. 2010;51:80S–87S.
 185. Kim HW, Faraneh-Far A, Kim RJ. Cardiovascular magnetic resonance in 
patients with myocardial infarction. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2009;55:1–16.
 186. Beek AM, van Rossum AC. Cardiovascular magnetic resonance im-aging in patients with acute myocardial infarction. Heart. 2010;96:  
237–243.
 187. Locca D, Bucciarelli-Ducci C, Ferrante G, La Manna A, Keenan NG, Grasso A, Barlis P , del Furia F, Prasad SK, Kaski JC, Pennell DJ, di Mario 
C. New universal definition of myocardial infarction applicable after 
complex percutaneous coronary interventions? JACC Cardiovasc Interv. 
2010;3:950–958.
 188. Schuleri KH, George RT, Lardo AC. Assessment of coronary blood flow 
with computed tomography and magnetic resonance imaging. J Nucl 
Cardiol. 2010;17:582–590.
 189. Dedic A, Lubbers MM, Schaap J, Lammers J, Lamfers EJ, Rensing BJ, Braam RL, Nathoe HM, Post JC, Nielen T, Beelen D, le Cocq d’Armandville 
MC, Rood PP , Schultz CJ, Moelker A, Ouhlous M, Boersma E, Nieman K. Coronary CT angiography for suspected ACS in the era of high-sensitivity troponins: randomized multicenter study. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2016;67:16–26.
 190. Eitel I, de Waha S, Wöhrle J, Fuernau G, Lurz P , Pauschinger M, Desch S, Schuler G, Thiele H. Comprehensive prognosis assessment by CMR imag-
ing after ST-segment elevation myocardial infarction. J Am Coll Cardiol. 
2014;64:1217–1226.
 191. Hoffmann U, Truong QA, Schoenfeld DA, Chou ET, Woodard PK, 
Nagurney JT, Pope JH, Hauser TH, White CS, Weiner SG, Kalanjian S, 
Mullins ME, Mikati I, Peacock WF, Zakroysky P , Hayden D, Goehler A, Lee 
H, Gazelle GS, Wiviott SD, Fleg JL, Udelson JE; ROMICAT-II Investigators. 
Coronary CT angiography versus standard evaluation in acute chest pain. N Engl J Med. 2012;367:299–308.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on November 12, 2025

Thygesen et al 2018 ESC/ACC/AHA/WHF Fourth Universal Definition of MI
Circulation. 2018;138:e618–e651. DOI: 10.1161/CIR.0000000000000617 November 13, 2018
 e651
CLINICAL STATEMENTS  
AND GUIDELINES 192. Puchner SB, Liu T, Mayrhofer T, Truong QA, Lee H, Fleg JL, Nagurney JT, 
Udelson JE, Hoffmann U, Ferencik M. High-risk plaque detected on coro-
nary CT angiography predicts acute coronary syndromes independent of 
significant stenosis in acute chest pain: results from the ROMICAT-II trial. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2014;64:684–692.
 193. Ferencik M, Liu T, Mayrhofer T, Puchner SB, Lu MT, Maurovich-Horvat P , Pope JH, Truong QA, Udelson JE, Peacock WF, White CS, Woodard PK, Fleg JL, Nagurney JT, Januzzi JL, Hoffmann U. hs-Troponin I followed by 
CT angiography improves acute coronary syndrome risk stratification ac-
curacy and work-up in acute chest pain patients: results from ROMICAT 
II Trial. JACC Cardiovasc Imaging. 2015;8:1272–1281.
 194. Amsterdam EA, Kirk JD, Bluemke DA, Diercks D, Farkouh ME, Garvey 
JL, Kontos MC, McCord J, Miller TD, Morise A, Newby LK, Ruberg 
FL, Scordo KA, Thompson PD. Testing of low-risk patients present-
ing to the emergency department with chest pain: a scientific state-ment from the American Heart Association. Circulation. 2010;122:  
1756–1776.
 195. European Medicines Agency/Committee for Medicinal Products for Human Use (CHMP). Reflection paper on assessment of cardiovascu-
lar safety profile of medical products. EMA/CHMP/50549/2015. http://
www.ema.europa.eu/docs/en_GB/document_library/Scientific_guide -
line/2016/03/WC500203804.pdf (25 Feb 2016).
 196. Hicks KA, Mahaffey KW, Mehran R, Nissen SE, Wiviott SD, Dunn B, Solomon SD, Marler JR, Teerlink JR, Farb A, Morrow DA, Targum SL, Sila 
CA, Hai MTT, Jaff MR, Joffe HV, Cutlip DE, Desai AS, Lewis EF, Gibson CM, Landray MJ, Lincoff AM, White CJ, Brooks SS, Rosenfield K, Domanski 
MJ, Lansky AJ, McMurray JJV, Tcheng JE, Steinhubl SR, Burton P , Mauri 
L, O’Connor CM, Pfeffer MA, Hung HMJ, Stockbridge NL, Chaitman 
BR, Temple RJ; Standardized Data Collection for Cardiovascular Trials Initiative (SCTI). 2017 Cardiovascular and stroke endpoint definitions 
for clinical trials. Circulation. 2018;137:961–972; J Am Coll Cardiol. 
2018;71:1021–1034.
 197. Leening MJ, Elias-Smale SE, Felix JF, Kors JA, Deckers JW, Hofman A, 
Stricker BH, Witteman JC. Unrecognised myocardial infarction and long-
term risk of heart failure in the elderly: the Rotterdam Study. Heart. 
2010;96:1458–1462.
 198. Karnegis JN, Matts J, Tuna N. Development and evolution of electro-
cardiographic Minnesota Q-QS codes in patients with acute myocardial 
infarction. Am Heart J. 1985;110:452–459.
 199. Goyal A, Gluckman TJ, Tcheng JE. What’s in a Name? The New ICD-10 
(10th Revision of the International Statistical Classification of Diseases 
and Related Health Problems) codes and type 2 myocardial infarction. 
Circulation. 2017;136:1180–1182.
 200. Rosamond W, Chambless L, Heiss G, Mosley T, Coresh J, Whitsel E, 
Wagenknecht L, Ni H, Folsom A. Twenty-two year trends in incidence of 
myocardial infarction, CHD mortality, and case-fatality in 4 US communi-ties, 1987-2008. Circulation. 2012;125:1848–1857.
 201. Luepker R, Duval S, Jacobs D, Smith L, Berger A. The effect of chang-ing diagnostic algorithms on acute myocardial infarction rates. Ann 
Epidemiol. 2011;21:824–829.
Downloaded from http://ahajournals.org by on November 12, 2025

